                                                BIRATIONAL INVARIANTS FROM HODGE STRUCTURES
                                                        AND QUANTUM MULTIPLICATION

                                                    Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue Yu




arXiv:2508.05105v1 [math.AG] 7 Aug 2025
                                                    Abstract. We introduce new invariants of smooth complex projective varieties, called
                                                Hodge atoms. Their construction combines rational Gromov-Witten invariants with classical
                                                Hodge theory and relies on the notion of an F-bundle, which is a non-archimedean version of a
                                                non-commutative Hodge structure. The Hodge atoms arise from the spectral decomposition
                                                of the F-bundle under the Euler vector field action, and behave additively under blowups, in
                                                accordance with Iritani’s blowup theorem. We compute several examples and demonstrate
                                                applications to birational geometry. In particular, we prove that a very general cubic fourfold
                                                is not rational. We also obtain a new proof of the equality of Hodge numbers of birational
                                                Calabi-Yau manifolds in any dimension. Furthermore, we show that the framework naturally
                                                extends to representations of other motivic Galois groups. This enables the theory of atoms
                                                to produce new obstructions to rationality over non-algebraically closed fields of characteristic
                                                zero as well.


                                          Contents
                                          1 Introduction                                                                                            2

                                          2 Atoms of equivariant singularities                                                                       9
                                            2.1 Isolated singularities of functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        9
                                            2.2 Equivariant isolated singularities of functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         12

                                          3 Generalities on F -bundles                                                                         17
                                            3.1 F -bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
                                            3.2 Operations on F -bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
                                            3.3 Natural symmetries of F -bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
                                            3.4 Maximal and overmaximal F -bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
                                            3.5 The A-model F -bundle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

                                          4 Decomposition theorems                                                                         42
                                            4.1 Spectral decomposition theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
                                            4.2 The blowup formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
                                            4.3 The Leray-Hirsch formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

                                          5 G-atoms                                                                                         47
                                            5.1 Mumford-Tate groups in the nc setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
                                            5.2 G-atoms of projective manifolds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
                                            5.3 G-atomic F-bundles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
                                            5.4 Hodge atoms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
                                            5.5 Atoms from motivated motives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63


                                                                                               1
           Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


6 New obstructions to rationality                                                                 64
  6.1 F -bundles and Givental’s theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
  6.2 Four-dimensional cubics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
  6.3 Birational maps of Calabi-Yau manifolds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
  6.4 Enhanced atoms and further examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74


1     Introduction
We propose new birational invariants of algebraic varieties that arise from a combination of classical
Hodge theory and Gromov-Witten theory. Even though we were guided and inspired by ideas
from Homological Mirror Symmetry (HMS), our arguments do not use the mirror duality directly.
Instead of HMS we utilize motivic information encoded in the algebraic and symplectic geometry
on the same projective manifold. This approach leads to new non-rationality results, and resolves
a number of classical problems studied in the foundational works of Beauville, Donagi, Debarre,
Hassett, Hyubrechts, Kulikov, Kuznetsov, Pirutka, Thomas, Tschinkel, Voisin, and many others
[8, 9, 19, 20, 21, 30, 31, 34, 35, 32, 42, 41, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 66, 5, 2, 77, 79, 78, 76]. In particular,
we prove the non-rationality of very general cubic fourfolds over the complex numbers. We also
study the non-rationality of varieties over non-algebraically closed fields, as well as applications and
examples in higher dimensions.
    In this work, we only scratch the surface of the realm of potential applications of quantum
cohomology to birational geometry. Given a smooth complex projective variety X, our main
invariants, called Hodge atoms, are pieces in an intrinsic decomposition of the so-called A-model F-
bundle associated to X, which is a non-archimedean version of variation of A-model non-commutative
Hodge structures (or nc-Hodge structures for short, see [48]). The A-model F-bundle consists of
enumerative data (coming from Gromov-Witten theory) on top of the Z/2-weighted version1 of the
classical polarized Q-Hodge structure H of X. We show that at a general point in the locus of Hodge
classes inside the base of the F-bundle (i.e. the Frobenius manifold), the generalized eigenspaces
for the quantum multiplication by the Euler vector field are compatible with the Hodge structure
on H. Concretely, we show that each generalized eigenspace decomposes canonically into Q-linear
representations of the Mumford-Tate group Hod of Z/2-graded polarizable pure Hodge structures,
which we call Hodge atoms. We prove that the chemical formula or atomic composition of X, i.e. the
collection of Hodge atoms appearing in the decomposition of H, behaves additively under blowups
and can be used as an obstruction to birational equivalence.
    The setup readily generalizes to other realizations of motives leading to variants of the notion
of Hodge atoms. The formalism of motivic atoms we develop here is just the beginning of a more
intricate story. Atoms are fairly coarse building blocks of nc-Hodge structures. For instance there
are no natural morphisms of atoms, so they do not form a category and thus are not well-suited
for studying specific birational maps. Atoms work well as first level obstructions to birational
equivalence but are far from being complete birational invariants. We will explore other more
enhanced theories in future works.
   Here is a more detailed overview of our work. Suppose for concreteness X is a complex
smooth projective variety. Let H := HB
                                     •
                                       (X, Q) be the rational Betti cohomoly of X taken with its
   1 Having Z/2-weights here means that we have folded the Z-grading of cohomology to a Z/2-grading, or equivalently,

that we consider Hodge structures modulo Tate twists. The loss of the Z-grading is natural from the point of view of
non-commutative geometry, see [48].


                                                         2
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Z/2-grading, let {Ti } be a homogeneous basis of H, and let t = (ti ) be the dual coordinates on H.
Write NE(X, Z) ⊂ N1 (X, Z) = im [CH1 (X) → H2 (X, Q)] for the monoid of numerically effective curve
classes on X, and let Q[[q]] denote the completion of the monoid algebra
Q[NE(X, Z)] = Q[q β | β ∈ NE(X, Z)] with respect to the maximal ideal (q β , β ̸= 0). The quantum
product for X
                                     ⋆ : H ⊗ H −→ H[[q, t]].
is a deformation of the cup product on H over the big Novikov ring NovX := Q[[q, t]] of X. This
deformation is given by Gromov-Witten invariants (see [52], which we will review in Section 3.5.1).
It gives rise to a structure of formal Frobenius manifold on a quotient of Spf NovX by a foliation
given by the divisor axiom (see [26, 60]).
    To extract birational invariants from symplectic data, we will work with a variant of the notion
of Frobenius manifold, which we call a F-bundle (see Section 3.1). It is a non-archimedean version
of several existing notions in the literature: TE-structure [37, 36], quantum D-module [43], and a
variation of nc-Hodge structures [48]. We have to pass to non-archimedean geometry for two reasons.
First, the complex analytic convergence of the series defining the quantum product is not known in
general. Second, and more crucially, the spectral decomposition theorem does not hold over the
complex numbers due to the Stokes phenomenon [48, 38].
    Abstractly a k-analytic F-bundle is specified by data (H, ∇)/B, where B is a k-analytic super-
manifold, H is a k-analytic vector bundle on B × D, where D denotes the germ at 0 in an analytic
disk with coordinate u, and ∇ is a meromorphic connection on H with poles at most at u = 0, and
such that ∇u2 ∂u and ∇uξ have no poles for all k-analytic vector fields ξ ∈ TB . Sections ξ ∈ TB act
on H|u=0 by the residues of ∇ξ at u = 0, and we say that the F-bundle is overmaximal if locally
on B we can find a cyclic vector for the action, and further say it is maximal if the evaluation on
the cyclic vector gives an isomorphism between TB and H|u=0 .
    The A-model F-bundle (H , ∇)/BX associated to X consists of a base BX which is roughly a
non-archimedean k-analytic space obtained from Spf Q[[q, t]], a trivial vector bundle H with fiber H
over B × D, and a meromorphic flat connection ∇ on H called the quantum connection:

                            ∇u∂u = u∂u − u−1 Eu ⋆(−) + Gr,
                            ∇∂ti = ∂ti + u−1 Ti ⋆ (−),
                           ∇ξq∂q = ξq∂q + u−1 ξ ⋆ (−)     for ξ ∈ H 2 (X, k),

where Eu ∈ Γ(B, H ) is the Euler element, Gr is the grading operator, and ξq∂q is the derivation of
k[[q]] given by ξq∂q (q β ) = (β · ξ)q β (see Section 3.5 for the details).
     The A-model F-bundle (H , ∇)/BX is overmaximal and can be made maximal by removing
redundant degree 2 variables on the base BX (implied by the divisor axiom of Gromov-Witten
invariants). Write (H, ∇)/BX for the resulting maximal F-bundle. For a rigid point b ∈ BX ,
the generalized eigenspace decomposition of the Eub ⋆(−) action on Hb,0 extends to a subbundle
decomposition of H|u=0 locally near b. The spectral             decomposition theorem from [38] implies
the base BX also locally splits into a product            Bi , and the F-bundle (H, ∇)/B splits into an
                                                       Q
external direct sum of maximal F-bundles (Hi , ∇i )/Bi , extending the above generalized eigenspace
decomposition.
   Let us look at an example of the spectral decomposition in the case of blowups. Consider the
blowup π : Xb → X along a smooth closed subvariety Z ⊂ X of codimension r ≥ 2. We have a


                                                  3
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


classical decomposition of cohomology
                                                           r−1
                                                           M
                                H • (X,
                                     b Q) ≃ H • (X, Q) ⊕         H • (Z, Q)[−2i].
                                                           i=1

This decomposition is in fact the eigenspace decomposition of the Euler vector field action at the
limiting point b∞ of√ B corresponding to the pullback π ∗ of an ample class on X. The eigenvalues
                   π   −1(2j−1)
are 0 and (r − 1)e    r−1    for j = 1, . . . , r − 1. The 0-eigenspace is isomorphic to H • (X, Q), and
the others all isomorphic to H • (Z, Q). As we move away from the limiting point, each eigenvalue
above may further split, as shown in Figure 1. In Section 4.2, we identify the factors resulting
from the spectral decomposition with the A-model F-bundle of X and (r − 1) copies of the A-model
F-bundles of Z, using Iritani’s blowup formula [44].




                                                 deforms to
                            0




                                Figure 1: Eigenvalues of the Eu-action at b∞

    Next we explain the construction of Hodge atoms. Let again X be a smooth complex projective
variety. Consider the subspace of its even cohomology spanned by the Hodge classes
                                            M
                              H(X)Hod :=       H i,i (X) ∩ H 2i (X, Q).
                                                 i

It gives a closed k-analytic subspace BX
                                       Hod
                                           ⊂ BX of the base of the maximal A-model F-bundle of
X. Let BeX → BX be the ramified spectral covering given by the eigenvalues of the Eu ⋆(−)-action,
let be UX ⊂ B Hod the locus where the number of eigenvalues of the Eu ⋆(−)-action is maximal,
and UeX := BeX,red ×B UX be the unramified part of the reduced spectral cover. The set of local
Hodge atoms of X is the set π0 (U eX ) of connected components of this unramified spectral cover.
The spectral decomposition theorem (see [38] and Theorem 4.1), blow-up theorem (see [44] and
Theorem 4.5), and the projective bundle decomposition theorem (see [45, 38] and Theorem 4.10)
imply that there are natural correspondences between the local Hodge atoms of X and the local
Hodge atoms of a blowup of X or the local Hodge atoms of a projective bundles over X. Using these
correspondences we define the set of Hodge atoms of smooth complex projective varieties
as the quotient set                                         ,
                                          G
                           HAtoms :=  π0 (U    eX )/ Aut(X)      ∼,
                                               [X]

where the union is taken over isomorphism classes of complex smooth projective varieties, and the
equivalence relation ∼ is generated by the elementary equivalences corresponding to disjoint unions,
blowups with smooth centers, and projective bundles.


                                                     4
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


   The atomic composition or chemical formula  P of a particular variety X is then the multiset
encoded in the finite support function CF(X) = α∈π (Ue )/ Aut(X) multα δα : HAtoms → Z≥0 ,
                                                     0 X

where multα is the degree of the cover U
                                       eX,α → UX corresponding to the connected component
α, and δα : HAtoms → Z≥0 is the delta function supported at the atom α ∈ HAtoms which is
represented by the local atom α.

Example. If the canonical class KX of X is nef, then CF(X) is a singleton, because the Eu-action
has a single eigenvalue in this case (see Lemma 5.24).

   The above discussion on blowups implies that CF( bX) = CF(X) + (r − 1)CF(Z). Since birational
equivalences between smooth projective varieties are generated by blowups with smooth centers of
codimension ≥ 2 we arrive at the following.


Non-rationality criterion: Let X be a d-dimensional smooth complex project variety (with
d ≥ 2). If there is an Hodge atom in the Hodge atomic composition of X that does not appear in the
Hodge atomic composition of any variety of dimension less than or equal to d − 2, then X is not
rational.

    Next we apply this criterion to show the non-rationality of certain 4-dimensional varieties. To
that end, we have to understand the Hodge atoms coming from varieties of dimension less than or
equal to 2, i.e. from points, curves and surfaces. Moreover, for each birational class of surfaces it is
sufficient to consider the atomic composition of one representative in the class.
    For every Hodge atom α represented by a local atom α ∈ π0 (U  eX )/ Aut(X), we get a well defined
F-bundle (Hα , ∇)/UX , which is a generalized eigenspace for the action of Eu ⋆(−) on the maximal
A-model F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX of X. The atoms formalism assures that this generalized eigenspace
F-bundle comes equipped with a natural action of the universl Mumford-Tate group Hod controlling
the Z/2-weighted, pure, rational Hodge structures. The isomorphism class of the finite dimensional
Hod-representation Hα |b,u=0 is well-defined independent of the choice the representative local atom
α or of the subsequent choice of a point b. In particular, we consider the following invariants of α:
    (1) dimension ρα of the space of Hodge classes: the dimension of the Hod-fixed subspace
of the fiber Hα |b,u=0 .
   (2) Hodge polynomial Pα ∈ Z[t, t−1 ]: the coefficient at tk is equal to the dimension of the
subspace of the fiber Hα |b,u=0 with (p − q)-degree equal to k.

   Let us calculate these invariants for atoms coming from points, curves and surfaces.
   (1) For any Hodge atom α coming from points or curves, we have Coeff t2 (Pα ) = 0.
   (2) For any Hodge atom α coming from a surface X with h2,0 = 0, we have Coeff t2 (Pα ) = 0.
     (3) By the classification of surfaces, we know that a minimal surface with a geometric genus ̸= 0
is always birational to a smooth S for which KS ≥ 0. Hence by the above example, a surface with
geometric genus ̸= 0 will contribute a single Hodge atom α with ρα ≥ 3 (containing the classes in
H 0 , H 4 and the first Chern class of an ample line bundle in H 2 ).

    Let X be a very general cubic 4-fold. Its Hodge diamond splits into the primitive part and an
irreducible transcendental part (see [75]).


                                                   5
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU




                         1                                        1                                       0
                     0        0                               0       0                               0        0
                 0       1        0                       0       1       0                       0       0        0
             0       0        0       0               0       0       0       0               0       0        0       0
         0                                0       0       0               0       0       0                                0
                                                                                      M
                 1       21       1           =                   1                               1       20       1
             0       0        0       0               0       0       0       0               0       0        0       0
                 0       1        0                       0       1       0                       0       0        0
                     0        0                               0       0                               0        0
                         1                                        1                                       0

    Let (H, ∇)/BX be the maximal A-model F-bundle associated to X. By Givental’s calcula-
tion [27] of the quantum product at a particular point b ∈ B, the Eu-action has eigenvalues
{0, 9, 9e2πi/3 , 9e4πi/3 }. The generalized eigenspace V corresponding to the eigenvalue 0 has di-
mension 24, containing the whole transcendental part. We have dim V Hod = 2, dim V p−q=−2 =
dim V p−q=2 = 1 and dim V p−q=0 = 22. The other three eigenspaces are 1-dimensional. As we move
from b to generic points in UX , V may further split, contributing more atoms, but there will always
be one atom α with ρα ≤ 2 and Coeff t2 (Pα ) = 1, which can not come from varieties of dimensions
less than or equal to 2. We conclude that X can not be rational.
Theorem (see Theorem 6.8). A very general 4-dimensional cubic hypersurface in CP5 is not
rational.
   In Section 6.3, we give another application of Hodge atoms. We obtain a new proof of Batyrev’s
theorem [7, Corollary 6.29] asserting that birationally equivalent Calabi-Yau manifolds have equal
Hodge numbers. The traditional proofs of this result [7, 80, 47] use either motivic integration, or
p-adic Hodge theory and Cěbotarev density. The proof via atoms is based on completely different
technology.
Theorem (see Theorem 6.16). Birationally equivalent Calabi-Yau manifolds have equal Hodge
numbers.
     By design, the theory of Hodge atoms is motivic in nature. It is a special case of a theory of
G-atoms governed by some proreductive alegbraic group G which controls a particular realization
of André motives. In the case of Hodge atoms the relevant group is the Galois group Hod of the
Tannakian category of polarizable pure Z/2-weighted Q-Hodge structures. We develop the general
theory of G-atoms for a general motivic Galois group G in Section 5. One variant of particular
interest is the theory of motivated atoms, given by G = MotK , the Galois group of the category
of a Z/2-graded version of André’s motives [3] equipped with the fiber functor of Betti cohomology.
     Motivated atoms are useful for detecting non-rationality over a subfield K ⊂ C which is not
algebraically closed. To illustrate the idea, consider a smooth hypersurface X of multi-degree
(1, 1, 1, 1) in P1 × P1 × P1 × P1 , defined over the algebraic closure K of K. It is isomorphic to the
blowup of P1 × P1 × P1 at an elliptic curve E, and hence the motivated atomic decomposition of X
contains 8 atoms associated to points and one more complicated atom αE associated to E.
     Now we consider a model X of X defined over the non-closed field K such that the Galois group
Gal(K/K) acts by permuting transitively the 4 factors in the product P1 × P1 × P1 × P1 . Let
(H, ∇)/BX be the A-model F-bundle associated to X. At a particular point b ∈ BX , the Eu-action


                                                                  6
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


has 3 eigenvalues with multiplicities 1, 4 and 7 respectively. The last generalized eigenspace has
Hodge polynomial 5 + t + t−1 and only 2 algebraic classes defined over K. Then this representation of
MotK cannot split further into representations coming from atoms associated to 0 and 1-dimensional
varieties over K. Hence we conclude the non-rationality of X/K.
    Many similar examples can be worked out in an analogous manner but we will leave these
to the future work [14]. In addition to the Hodge atoms and motivated atoms, we will consider
other enhanced versions of atoms, e.g. atoms which are furnished with the image of the topological
K-theory in the nc-Hodge structure, or atoms enhanced with Mukai pairings or Serre automorphisms.
The theory of enhanced atoms will be developed in the forthcoming work [49], where many more
applications are worked out. Here we concentrate on the foundations of the theory of atoms and
their most basic applications as obstructions to rationality.
    This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we motivate the theory of F-bundles and atoms
from a special case of the mirror symmetry B-model, in the elementary context of equivariant
isolated singularities. The constructions in this section have no direct relation to the A-model
invariants or rationality we discuss in the rest of the paper. In Section 3.1, we introduce and study
F-bundles, which is a formal/non-archimedean version of non-commutative Hodge structure. In
particular in Section 3.5.2 we introduce the non-archimedean A-model F-bundle of a complex smooth
projective variety, the main object underpinning the construction of atoms. Section 4 discusses the
spectral decomposition of F-bundles as well as the decomposition of F-bundles associated to blowups
and projective bundles. In Section 5, we develop the general theory of G-atoms for any motivic
Galois group G. Finally in Section 6, we apply the theory of atoms to obtain new obstructions
to rationality in birational geometry. After recasting Givental’s classical quantum cohomology
computation in the language of F-bundles in Section 6.2, we use Hodge atoms to show that the very
general cubic fourfold is not rational. In Section 6.3 we use Hodge atoms to give a new proof of
the equality of Hodge numbers of birational Calabi-Yau manifolds in any dimension. Finally in
Section 6.4 we discuss briefly enhancements of atoms and illustrate how enhanced atoms lead to
further non-rationality results.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Denis Auroux, Hiroshi Iritani and Yuri Tschinkel for their interest and
for their invaluable help at various stages of this work. We are grateful to Leonardo Cavenaghi,
Sheel Ganatra, Mark Gross, Thorgal Hinault, Y.P. Lee, Ernesto Lupercio, James McKernan, Todor
Milanov, Yong-Geun Oh, Yukinobu Toda, Chenyang Xu, Song Yu, Chi Zhang and Shaowu Zhang
for inspiring discussions around the subject.
    During the preparation of this paper Ludmil Katzarkov was supported by the National Science
Fund of Bulgaria, the National Scientific Program “VIHREN” (Project no. KP-06-DV-7), the Institute
of Mathematics and Informatics of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, the Simons Foundation
(grant SFI-MPS-T-Institutes-00007697), the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of
Bulgaria (contract DO1-239/10.12.2024), the Basic Research Program of the National Research
University Higher School of Economics, the Simons Investigators Award (no. 003136), the Simons
Collaboration on Homological Mirror Symmetry (award no. 003093), and by the NSF FRG grant
DMS-2245099. Tony Pantev was supported by the Simons Collaboration on Homological mirror
symmetry (award no. 347070) and the NSF FRG grants DMS-2244978 and DMS-2245099. Tony
Yue Yu was partially supported by the NSF grants DMS-2302095 and DMS-2245099.
    In addition, Ludmil Katzarkov and Maxim Kontsevich are grateful to Jeffrey Fuqua for his


                                                 7
            Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


continuous financial support of mathematical research throughout the years, and for his support
and leadership in establishing the excellent creative environment at IMSA, University of Miami,
where much of this work was done.

Notation and conventions
k                     a field of characteristic zero, coefficient field of a Weil cohomology theory.
k⊃k                   an algebraically closed non-archimedean field whose absolute value is trivial on k.
K                     a field of characteristic zero, base field of smooth projective varieties, typically
                      chosen to be a subfield of C.
D                     the germ at 0 of a k-analytic affine line with coordinate u.
(H, ∇)/B              an F-bundle over a k-analytic space B.
κ = ∇u2 ∂u |Hu=0 the residual endomorphism on Hu=0 .
◦                     the Frobenius product on TB associated with a maximal F-bundle.
Eu                    the Euler vector field on B associated with a maximal F-bundle.
Ho                    the restriction H|u=0 .
⟨γ1 · · · γn ⟩g,n,β   Gromov-Witten invariants. We omit g and n from the notation when g = 0 and n
                      is evident.
⋆                     the big quantum product on the cohomology H • (X) of a smooth projective variety
                      X.
Deg                   the degree operator on H • (X).
Gr                    the grading operator on H • (X).
NE(X, Z)              the monoid of numerical equivalence classes of effective curves.
NS(X, Z)              the Néron-Severi group of X.
N1 (X, Z)             the group of numerical equivalence classes of divisors in X, also equal to the
                      maximal torsion-free quotient NS(X, Z)tf of the Néron-Severi group of X.
N1 (X, Z)             the group of numerical equivalence classes of curves in X.
CK                    the Q-linear Tannakian category of André motives of smooth projective K-varieties.
C K /Tate             the Q-linear category of nc-André motives of smooth projective K-varieties.
GK                    the pro-reductive motivic Galois group for André motives of smooth projective
                      K-varieties.
(G, ϵG )              a proreductive algebraic group over k with a marked central element ϵG of order 2.
(H, ϵH )              the symmetry group of Hochschild graded Dolbeault cohomology.
(Hod, ϵHod )          the Mumford-Tate group of Z/2-weighted pure Hodge structures.
(Mot, ϵMot )          the Galois group of the Z/2-weighted version of André’s motivated motives.
U
eX                    the unramified part of the reduced spectral cover associated with the operator κ
                      attached to the A-model k-analytic F-bundle of X.
AtomsK
     G                the set of G-atoms of smooth projective K-varieties.


                                                        8
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


CFG (X)           the chemical formula or G-atomic composition of X, i.e. the multiset of G-atoms
                  of X together with their multiplicities.
AtomsK,F
     G            the set of geometric G-atomic F-bundles for smooth projective K-varieties.
CFFG (X)          the multiset of geometric G-atomic F-bundles arising from X together with their
                  multiplicities.
HAtoms            the set of Hodge atoms of complex smooth projective varieties.



2       Atoms of equivariant singularities
To motivate the general theory we start with a particular B-model example dealing with simplified
nc-Hodge theoretic invariants of equivariant isolated singularities of functions. We regard these
simplified invariants as “baby atoms”. On its own this example is not related to any birational
invariants but we include it since it provides valuable conceptual insights into the general theory we
will develop later.

2.1     Isolated singularities of functions
Recall that if f : (X, x0 ) → C is an analytic germ of a function on a d-dimensional manifold X, with
an isolated critical point x0 , then the Milnor number µf of f is a basic numerical invariant of the
germ, which is given by
                                       µf = dimC (OX,x0 /J(f )) ,
                             (−)⌟ df
                                       / OX,x
                    h                               i
where J(f ) := image T                          0
                                                        is the Jacobian ideal of f . Furthermore, since the
singularity of f at x0 is isolated, the Milnor number is finite and the function germ (X, x0 , f ) has a
universal unfolding which is a family of function germs

                                       F : (X × Uf , (x0 , u0 )) −→ C

such that F |(X,x0 )×{u0 } = f , the family is parametrized by a germ (Uf , u0 ) of a µf -dimensional man-
ifold, and the natural map TUf ,u0 → OX,x0 /J(f ) given by v 7→ [(Liev F )|X×{u0 } ] is an isomorphism
of vector spaces.
    Explicitly, a model for the universal unfolding is constructed as follows. Let Milnorf,x0 :=
OX,x0 /J(f ) be the Milnor ring of f at x0 , and let g1 , . . . , gµf ∈ OX,x0 be a collection of function
germs whose images form a basis of Milnorf,x0 as a complex vector space. Then we get a family of
holomorphic functions
                                                                                   µf
                                                                                   X
(2.1)               F : (X × C , (x0 , 0)) −→ C,
                               µf
                                                               (x, z) 7→ f (x) +         zi gi (x).
                                                                                   i=1

We can then take (Uf , u0 ) to be the germ of (Cµf , 0), and F to be the germ of the function (2.1).
The universal unfolding is a well defined family of germs and the analytic automorphisms of the
singularity (X, x0 , f ) act naturally on the model universal unfolding (X × Uf , (x0 , u0 ), F ) defined
above.


                                                           9
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


    Intrinsically one can construct and work with the universal unfolding as follows. Let X be a
d-dimensional complex manifold, x0 ∈ X, and let f : X → C be the germ at x0 of a holomorphic
function for which x0 is an isolated critical point. Let x0 ∈ V ⊂ X be a Stein neighborhood on
which f is defined, and such that x0 is the only critical point of f in V . Let x0 ∈ B ⊂ V , be a
smaller Stein neighborhood, which is an open eucledian ball and such that the closure B of B in X,
is contained in V .
    Consider the space

                       MB := g ∈ O(B) dgx ̸= 0 ∈ TX,x   ∨
                                                           , for all x ∈ ∂B .
                              


Note that the algebra O(B) of holomorphic functions on the Stein compact B is naturally a nuclear
Fréchet C-vector space with respect to the topology of compact convergence [29, Chapter V.6.1], and
so the open subspace MB ⊂ O(B) is naturally an infinite dimensional complex Fréchet manifold.
This manifold represents the moduli functor which to every Stein set S assigns the set of all
holomorphic functions on S × B whose relative differential over S does not vanish anywhere S × ∂B.
    At each point g ∈ M the tangent space TMB ,g is naturally identified with O(B), and it contains
a natural closed subspace of finite codimension, namely the image

                                                        Lie(−) g
                                                                   / O(B)
                                          h                                 i
                               Lg := image TX (B)

of the "evaluation on g" map ξ → Lieξ g from holomorphic vector fields to holomorphic functions on
B. The codimension of Lg in TMB ,g is equal to the degree of the natural map

                                             / (Cd − {0})/R>0 ,                           dgx
(2.2)                mg :     ∂B                                            mg (x) :=            ,
                                                                                        ||dgx ||

                            S 2d−1                  S 2d−1

and so codim(Lg ⊂ TMB ,g ) is equal to the sum x∈crit(g) µg,x of the Milnor numbers of g at all
                                                    P

critical points crit(g) = zero(dg) of g in B.
    In particular L ⊂ TMB is a holomorphic foliation of finite codimension on MB . Given a point
g ∈ MB we will write [g] for the leaf of this foliation through g. The universal unfolding Uf of the
singularity germ (X, x0 , f ) is canonically the germ of the leaf space [MB /L] of this foliation at the
point [f ]. The explicit model we considered above is a holomorphic slice through f to the leaves of
L. Note that this approach allows us to define a canonical universal unfolding Ug for any g ∈ MB
by simply taking Ug to be the germ at [g] of the leaf space [MB /L].
    For [g] ∈ Uf , we still have the identification TUf ,[g] ∼
                                                             = Milnorg = O(B)/J(g), where J(g) =
                (−)⌟ dg
                        / O(B) is the global Jacobian ideal of g on B. This identification induces an
       h                        i
image T (B)
analytic commutative associative product

                                     ◦ : TUf ⊗OUf TUf −→ TUf ,

which is just K. Saito’s Frobenius manifold structure [69, 70, 71, 26, 68] on Uf . Being open in a
Fréchet vector space, the infinite dimensional manifold M will have a natural holomorphic Euler
vector field corresponding to the scaling action of C on O(B). The projection of this vector field in
TMB /L gives a holomorphic vector field Eu on the universal unfolding Uf .


                                                  10
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


    The operator κ := Eu ◦ (−) : TUf → TUf is an analytic vector bundle endomorphism, and
for any point [g] ∈ Uf we have that κ[g] : TUf ,[g] → TUf ,[g] preserves the natural decomposition
TUf ,[g] = Milnorg = ⊕x∈crit(g) Milnorg,x , where Milnorg,x = OX,x /J(g). Furthermore, for each
x ∈ crit(g), the subspace Milnorg,x ⊂ Milnorg is the generalized eigenspace of κ[g] of eigenvalue g(x).
   Saito’s theory of Frobenius structures of singularities [69], [68, Chapter VI] implies that we have
the following decomposition

Theorem 2.3. Let (X, x0 , f ) be the germ of an isolated singularity of a holomorphic function on
a d-dimensional manifold. Let g ∈ MB be a point close to f ∈ MB . Then the germ Uf ([g]) of the
universal unfolding of f at the point [g] ∈ Uf decomposes canonically into a product

                                       Uf ([g]) ∼
                                                         Y
                                                =               U xg ,
                                                    x∈crit(g)


where (X, x, xg ) is the germ of g at x. Moreover this decomposition is compatible with Saito’s
Frobenius structures and with Euler vector fields.

    Let Aut(f ) denote the group of biholomorphic automorphisms of the germ (X, x0 , f ). It is a
Fréchet analytic Lie group which naturally acts on the germ Mf of the universal unfolding. Its
connected component Aut0 (f ) acts trivially and Aut(f ) acts trough its quotient Aut(f ) → π0 (Aut(f )).
By the approximation theorem, the group π0 (Aut(f )) will act with finite stabilizers and so the
moduli Mf := [Mf /π0 (Aut(f ))] of deformations of f will be a germ of a complex analytic orbifold.
    The intrinsic construction of Uf works equally well to produce a "global" universal unfolding
parametrizing functions on d-dimensional manifolds with isolated singularities and a given Milnor
number µ. More precisely, we can consider the subset MB,µ ⊂ MB comprised of all g ∈ MB such
that deg mg = µ. Then MB,µ is a union of connected components of MB . By the discussion above
the leaf space [MB,µ /L] is a smooth complex analytic orbifold Ud,µ with finite stabilizers (possibly
non-separated), which we will think of as the universal unfolding of d-dimensional germs functions
with isolated singularities with Milnor number µ. Again the tangent bundle TUd,µ is equipped with
a Frobenius product, we have an Euler vector field Eu on Ud,µ , and the germ of Ud,µ at any point
[g] decomposes into a product of pieces compatible with Frobenius products and Euler fields, so
that each piece corresponds to the generalized eigenspace of the operator Eu[g] ◦ (−).
    The moduli Md,µ of d-dimensional germs of functions with a single isolated singularity of Milnor
number µ is then a closed, possibly singular, analytic substack in Ud,µ . Note that Md,µ is in fact an
algebraic Deligne-Mumford stack defined over Q. The formal completion Ud,µ   ∧
                                                                                 of Ud,µ along Ud,µ is
a formal stack over Q (in general non-algebraizable) which is a smooth thickening of Md,µ .

Remark 2.4. By the theory of Frobenius manifolds [60] we know that the Frobenius powers
Euk := Eu◦k of the Euler vector field satisfy the relations of the Witt Lie algebra of polynomial
vector fields on the affine line, i.e.
                           h           i
(2.5)                        Euk , Eul = (l − k) Euk+l−1 , for all k, l ≥ 0,

where we view Eu◦k as a holomorphic vector field on Ud,µ , and the bracket in (2.5) is the Lie bracket
on vector fields on Ud,µ .


                                                    11
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


    In an open dense domain of Ud,µ the function has µ isolated Mores singularities, and the local
coordinates on Ud,µ are given by the critical values x1 , . . . , xµ . The Euler field and its powers are
given by                            X                      X
                               Eu =      xi ∂xi , Euk =           xki ∂xi .
                                           i                   i

   Suppose [f ] ∈ Ud,µ is a germ of a function with isolated singularities with total Milnor number
µ. One can show that there n is a well defined
                                               germ of a complex analytic submanifold W ⊂ Ud,µ at
                                   o
point [f ] such that spanC       k
                             Eu[g]          = TW ,[g] for all [g] ∈ W close to [f ]. Moreover, the critical
                                     k≥0
points of [g] are in canonical bijection with the critical points of [f ] and that bijection preserves the
multiplicities.
   The picture becomes even more interesting when we consider equivariant isolated singularities of
functions.

2.2    Equivariant isolated singularities of functions
For ease of reference let us introduce the following
Definition 2.6. Let G be a finite group. A d-dimensional complex analytic G-equivariant
function germ with isolated singularities is the data (G X, f ), where
                                                                   ⟳
   (1) Y is a possibly disconnected complex d-dimensional manifold .
   (2) Y is equipped with a holomorphic G-action G        ⟳   Y.
   (3) w : Y → C is a G-invariant holomorphic function, with isolated critical points, such that the
G-action on crit(w) is transitive.
   (4) (X, f ) is the G-equivariant germ of (Y, w) at the subset crit(w).
   Note that our condition requiring that w is invariant and that the G-action on crit(w) is transitive
implies that a G-equivariant germ always has a single critical value.
Example 2.7. Consider the action of Z/N on C given by k 7→ (z 7→ ζ k · z) for some primitive N -th
root of unity ζ. The function C → C, z 7→ z N is Z/N -invariant, and its derivative N z N −1 vanishes
only at z = 0. Therefore if we take X to be the germ of C at 0 ∈ C and f to be the germ of z 7→ z N
at 0, then the data (Z/N X, f ) is a Z/N -equivariant function germ with isolated singularities.
                           ⟳

Remark 2.8.        (1) If G = {e} is the trivial group, then a d-dimensional G-equivariant function
germ with isolated singularities is just a germ (X, f ) of a holomorphic function on a d-dimensional
manifold at an isolated critical point of the function.
   (2) Suppose (G X, f ) is a G-equivariant function germ with isolated singularities and let p ∈ X
                    ⟳
be a critical point of f . Let H ⊂ G be the stabilizer of p ∈ X, let X(p) be the connected component
of X containing p, and let pf = f |X(p) . Equivalently p ∈ crit(w) ⊂ Y , X(p) is the germ of Y at p,
and pf is the germ of w at p ∈ Y . In this situation H acts on X(p) by analytic isomorphisms and
(H X(p), pf ) is an H-equivariant function germ with a single isolated singularity.
  ⟳
    (3) Conversely, suppose (H X, f ) is a d-dimensional H-equivariant function germ with a single
                                 ⟳
isolated singularity. Suppose H ⊂ G of H is embedded as a subgroup
                                                                   in some finite group  G. Then
we can construct an induced d-dimensional G-equivariant germ G indG     ⟳
                                                                        H (X), indG
                                                                                  H (f )  . Here


                                                    12
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


   (1) indG  H (X) := G ×H X = (G × X)/H, where h ∈ H acts on (a, x) ∈ G × X by h · (a, x) =
(ah , h(x)).
   −1

   (2) indG  H (X) = G ×H X is equipped with the left translation G-action, i.e. a ∈ G acts on [(b, x)]
by a · [(b, x)] := [(ab, x)].
   (3) indG  H (f ) : indH (X) −→ C is the holomorphic function given by indH (f )([(a, x)]) = f (x).
                         G                                                      G

This function is well defined since f is H-invariant.
   The group H acts freely on G × X and so indG      H (X) is a complex manifold germ. It maps
holomorphically onto the zero dimensional complex manifold G/H and in fact indG   H (X) is (non-
canonically) identified with a disjoint union of # (G/H)-copies of X.
Definition 2.9. Let (G X, f ) be a G-equivariant function germ with isolated singularities. We
                         ⟳
define the G-equivariant Milnor number µG f of the germ to be the dimension of the G-invariants
in the Milnor ring Milnorf (X) of f .
   By definition Milnorf (X) is the ring of global analytic function on the closed analytic subgerm
                                                                       (−)⌟ df
                                                                               / OX of f . Since by
                                                                h                  i
in X defined by the sheaf of Jacobian ideals J (f ) := image TX
assumption f has isolated critical points, we have that
                                                   M
                                  Milnorf (X) =          Milnorf,x ,
                                                   x∈crit(f )

and so                                                                                  G
                                               G
                                                                      M
                     f = dimC (Milnorf (X))
                    µG                             = dimC                       Milnorf,x  .
                                                                    x∈crit(f )

Equivalently, µG
               f is the dimension of the G-invariants TUf ,u0 in the tangent space of the base of the
                                                       G

unversal unfolding at the base point u0 ∈ Uf . Note that by definition we have 0 ≤ µG  f ≤ µf .

Example 2.10. Let as before ((Z/N ) X, f ) denote the germ of (C, 0, z N ) viewed as Z/N -
                                           ⟳
equivariant germ for the action given by a primitive N -th root of unity. In this case the Milnor ring
is C{z}/(z N −1 ) ∼
                  = CN −1 and (C{z}/(z))Z/N ∼ = C, and so µf = N − 1 and µf = 1.
                                                                               Z/N


   In the G-equivariant context, if the finite group G acts on the germ X preserving f , then, as
explained in the previous section, the group G will act on the universal unfolding (Uf , u0 ). In
particular, the linear action of G on the Milnor ring Milnorf (X) is compatible with the linear action
of G on the tangent space TUf ,u0 .
   With this picture in mind we now have the following
Definition 2.11. We will say that a G-equivariant germ (G X, f ) of a function with isolated
                                                                           ⟳
singularities is strongly atomic if, for a general point g ∈ UG f , the G-invariant function g : X → C
has a unique critical point, and we will say that (G , X, f ) is atomic if, for a general point g ∈ UG
                                                     ⟳                                               f ,
the function g has a single G-orbit of critical points.
    Note that strongly atomic equivariant germs of functions are automatically atomic. In the other
direction, if a G-equivariant germ (G X, f ) is atomic, then the single singular fiber of f will be a
                                      ⟳
G-stable hypersurface with finitely many isolated singularities which are transitively permuted by


                                                   13
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


the action of G. In other words, f will have finitely many isolated critical points which form a single
G-orbit with stabilizer H ⊂ G (defined up to conjugation), and such that the germ of (X, f ) at
each critical point s ∈ crit(f ) ⊂ X is an H-equivariant germ of a function with isolated singularities.
In other words an atomic G-equivariant germ has a generic G-equivariant unfolding which splits
into a G-orbit of H-equivariant strongly atomic singularity germs. This constrained behavior of the
G-equivariant unfolding of atomic singularities reflects the minimality of the deformation and is
tightly related to the structure of the universal deformation.
    Thus, unfolding spaces — particularly the base of the universal deformation — provide the
natural geometric framework for understanding the infinitesimal deformations of singularities, while
the G-action further refines this picture by isolating those deformation directions that are compatible
with the symmetry. The notion of atomicity for a G-equivariant isolated hypersurface singularity
relies on the universal deformation structure since it ensures that, in a generic G-symmetric unfolding,
the critical locus remains as simple as possible.

   The first general observation we have is the following.

Proposition 2.12.        (i) The moduli problem for atomic G-equivariant isolated hypersurface sin-
gularities of fixed dimension d, fixed Milnor number µ, and fixed equivariant Milnor number µG , is
representable by an algebraic Deligne–Mumford stack of finite type Md,µ,µG , defined over Q.
   (ii) The moduli stack Md,µ,µG can be thickened canonically Md,µ,µG ⊂ Ud,µ,µG to an analytic
smooth orbifold Ud,µ,µG of dimension µ, equipped with a G-action, and such that
                                                                 G
                                      Md,µ,µG =        Ud,µ,µG        .

   (iii) The formal completion
                                               Ud,µ,µ
                                                 ∧
                                                      G


of the thickened moduli stack Ud,µ,µG along Md,µ,µG is a smooth generally non-agebraizable formal
Deligne–Mumford stack of finite type over Q.

Proof. (i) The moduli stack Md,µ,µG is constructed as the quotient of the G-invariant universal
unfolding base space by the automorphism group of the germ. By Definition 2.6, the automorphisms
preserving the G-action form a proper groupoid with finite stabilizers, ensuring the stack is Deligne–
Mumford. Finite type over Q follows from the fact that the ring of G-invariant jets is Noetherian.
    (ii) The thickened moduli Ud,µ,µG is the quotient of the germ of the universal unfolding base
space along its G-invariant part. The G-action on the universal unfolding induces the structure of a
G-equivariant analytic germ.
    Smoothness follows from the unobstructedness of G-equivariant deformations. Non-algebraizabi-
lity arises as the thickening captures formal but non-convergent deformations. The stack structure
persists via formal GAGA for Artin stacks.

   Next we look at the special structures one has on these moduli.

Proposition 2.13.        (i) The moduli space Ud,µ,µG carries a natural structure of a smooth F-stack
in the sense of Hertling-Manin. In particular its tangent bundle T is equipped with a commutative,
associative product ◦ : T × T → T and an Euler vector field Eu ∈ Γ(Ud,µ,µG , T ).


                                                  14
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


    (ii) The F-stack structure on Ud,µ,µG is G-equivariant and hence the tangent bundle of the moduli
stack                                                       G
                                       Md,µ,µG = Ud,µ,µG
inherits a well-defined multiplication and an Euler field eu := Eu |Md,µ,µG , such that the reduced
spectrum of the operator eu ◦ (−) : TMd,µ,µG → TMd,µ,µG consists of a single point.

Proof. (i) The tangent space at a point G X, f of Ud,µ,µG is the Milnor algebra O(X)/J(f ) of
                                                    
                                             ⟳
f and the value of Eu at this point is given by f ∈ O(X)/J(f ). Saito’s Frobenius structure on the
base of the universal unfolding provides the multiplication, and everything is compatible with the
G-action. The Euler field Eu scales deformations homogeneously and is preserved under G.
   (ii) On the G-fixed locus, the multiplication reduces to the tensor product of invariant subspaces.
The restriction eu ◦ (−) of the multiplication by Euler vector field to the subsbundle of G-invariants
acts with a single eigenvalue as deformations are graded by G-invariant monomials, collapsing the
spectrum.

   We will write M Gd,µ,µG for the union of all components of Md,µ,µG that parametrize strongly
atomic G-equivariant germs of functions.
   With these structures in place we can now define the set of atoms of G-equivariant isolated
hypersurface singularities by setting
                                             G G                .
                            Atomssing
                                   G   = π0            MH d,µ,µH    G.
                                              H⊂G d,µ,µH

where G acts on the set of its subgroups by conjugation.
   The set Atomssing
                   G   is countable and to every G-equivariant isolated hypersurface singularity
(G X, f ) , one can associate its atomic composition which consists of all atoms represented by
  ⟳
atomic singularities appearing in the G-invariant unfolding of f . Thus we get a chemical formula of
(G X, f ) which is a finite combination of atoms with non-negative integer coefficients.
  ⟳
    Given two G-equivariant germs (G X, f ) and (G Y, y0 , g) of isolated hypersurface singularities,
                                      ⟳               ⟳
we will denote their external sum by (X × Y, (x0 , y0 ), f ⊞ g), where (f ⊞ g)(x, y) := f (x) + g(y)
for all (x, y) ∈ X × Y . The external sum is again a germ of an isolated hypersurface singularity,
which is G-equivariant for the diagonal action of G on X × Y . The Thom-Sebastiani formula for
the external sum of potentials implies that we have an isomorphism of complex vector spaces

                                  Milnorf ⊞g = Milnorf ⊗C Milnorg ,

which is compatible with G-actions.
    Splitting the external sum of G-equivariant singularity germs into its atomic composition gives a
well defined map
                                                                              
(2.14)                Atomssing
                             G  × Atomssing
                                         G    −→ Mapsfsupp Atomssing  G , Z≥0

                               
where Mapsfsupp Atomssing
                     G    , Z≥0   denotes all maps from Atomssing
                                                             G    to Z≥0 with finite support.
   Explicitly the map (2.14) is defined as follows. Suppose H1 , H2 ⊂ G are two subgroups and let
α1 ∈ M d1 ,µ1 ,µH1 and α2 ∈ M d2 ,µ2 ,µH2 be two G-atoms of singularities, that are represented by
               1                      2




                                                 15
           Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


equivariant germs (H1 X1 , f1 ) and (H2 X2 , f2 ) respectively. Then the map (2.14) sends the pair
                         ⟳                    ⟳
(α1 , α2 ) to the formal sum of atoms with multiplicities appearing in the atomic composition of the
Thom-Sebastiani sum
                                                                                
                                 H1 (X1 ) × indH2 (X2 ) , indH1 (f1 ) ⊞ indH1 (f1 ) .
                              indG             G             G             G
                         G ⟳

   Extending
              the map (2.14) by multiplicativity then induces a product structure on
Mapsfsupp Atomssing , Z≥0 whose structure constants are integers. This equips the additive semi-
                G            
group Mapsfsupp Atomssing
                       G , Z≥0 with the structure of a unital commutative semiring and the
                                    
abelian group Mapsfsupp Atomssing
                             G    , Z  with the structure of a unital commutative ring.

Example 2.15. Fix a positive integer N > 1. Let X1 = C with coordinate x1 , X2 = C with
coordinate x2 , and let f1 (x1 ) = xN
                                    1 and f2 (x2 ) = x2 . The group G of N -th roots of unity acts on
                                                      N

X1 and X2 by
                             ζ 7→ (x1 → ζx1 ) and k 7→ (x2 → ζ −1 x2 ).
The equivariant germs (G X1 , f1 ) and (G X2 , f2 ) are atomic and their external sum is (G X1 ×
                             ⟳                  ⟳                                                       ⟳
      1 + x2 ). The G-equivariant universal unfolding of (G X1 × X2 , x1 + x2 ) is given by
X2 , xN    N                                                        ⟳    N     N


                   F : X1 × X2 × C2 −→ C,              F (x, z) = xN
                                                                   1 + x2 − z1 x1 x2 + z2 .
                                                                        N


Fix a general point z ∈ C2 , s.t. z1 ̸= 0. With this fixed z we can view F (x, z) as a function of x
whose Jacobian ideal is generated by
                                  −1                                        −1
                ∂x1 F (x, z) = xN
                                1    − (z1 /N )x2     and ∂x2 F (x, z) = xN
                                                                          2    − (z1 /N )x1 .

Thus F (x, z) has (N − 1)2 Morse critical points which map to N − 1 critical values which are equal
to z2 , z2 − (N − 2)c1 , . . . , z2 − (N − 2)cN −2 where c1 , . . . , cN −2 label the distinct (N − 2)nd roots of
(z1 /N )N . Over the critical value z2 there is a single critical point (x1 , x2 ) = (0, 0), and over each of
the other critical values there is a set of N critical points on which G acts simply transitively. More
precisely, over the critical value z2 − (N − 2)ci we have N Morse critical points with coordinates
(x1 , x2 ) = (β, (z1 /N )β −1 ), where β runs over the N th roots of ci . Thus in the atomic composition of
(G X1 × X2 , xN
  ⟳                1 + x2 ) we have two atoms. One is isomorphic to the G-equivariant 2-dimensional
                          N

Morse singularity (C2 , x1 x2 ) equipped with the G-action ζ : (x1 , x2 ) 7→ (ζx1 , ζ −1 x2 ), and the other
is isomorphic to the 2-dimensional Morse singularity (C2 , x1 x2 ) viewed as an H-equivariant germ of
function with isolated singularities, where H = {1} ⊂ G is the trivial subgroup. In the chemical
formula of (G X1 × X2 , xN
               ⟳                  1 + x2 ), the first atom enters with multiplicity 1, while the second atom
                                       N

enters with multiplicity N − 2.
Remark 2.16.         (1) The structure theory of atoms of equivariant singularities can be upgraded
to the setting of F-bundles discussed in the next section.
    (2) In the case of the trivial group G, we recover the discussion from the previous section: we have
a unique atom corresponding to the Morse quadratic singularity x21 + · · · + x2d = 0 since Morsification
shows that each isolated singularity (X, x0 , f ) unfolds to a disjoint union of µf quadratic Morse
singularities.
   (3) One can stabilize the above definition of atoms of G equivariant isolated singularities by
adding Morse singularities with trivial G-action.


                                                       16
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


    (4) The analogue of Remark 2.4 also holds for G-equivariant germs of functions with isolated
singularities. More precisely, if [f ] ∈ Md,µ,µG = (Ud,µ,µG )G and we know that the Frobenius powers
of Eu span TMd,µ,µG ,[f ] , then the atomic composition of [f ] can not split further for germs [g] in a
neighborhood of [f ] in Md,µ,µG .


3       Generalities on F -bundles
In this section, we introduce the notion of an F-bundle, which captures variations of linearizations
of non-commutative geometry, given by the formal part of non-commutative Hodge structures (see
[48]).

3.1     F -bundles
Our main objects of interest will be defined in the non-archimedean analytic setting.

3.1.1    Definition of F -bundles
We fix a non-archimedean normed field k of characteristic 0. Let D denote the germ at 0 in a
k-analytic unit disk with coordinate u.

Definition 3.1. A non-archimedean k-analytic F-bundle, or simply an F-bundle is a triple
(H, ∇)/B, in which
   (1) B is a smooth k-analytic super variety or a germ of smooth k-analytic super variety along
an even closed smooth k-analytic subvariety.
    (2) H is a k-analytic super vector bundle over B × D.
   (3) ∇ is a meromorphic flat connection on H with poles at most at B × {0}, such that for any
locally defined vector field ξ on B the operators ∇u2 ∂u and ∇uξ are regular, i.e. have no poles.

Remark 3.2.        (i) The letter F in the name F-bundle comes from Frobenius, since F-bundles are
variants of the Frobenius manifolds introduced by Dubrovin [26] for the study of WDVV equations.
An F-bundle is also a non-archimedean version of the notion of TE-structures introduced by Hertling
[37]. The complex analytic TE-structures are not suitable for our A-model considerations without the
convergence assumptions on the Gromov-Witten potential. Furthermore, the spectral decomposition
theorem (Theorem 4.1) does not hold in the complex analytic setting due to the Stokes phenomenon.
By working in the non-archimedean setting, we avoid these issues, but retain most of the intuition
coming from the complex picture.
   (ii) From the perspective of non-commutative geometry, an F-bundle is a non-archimedean
analytic version of the de Rham part of a variation of non-commutative Hodge structures (see [48,
§2.1.5,§2.3.1]). Examples of F-bunldes arise naturally from deformations of A∞ categories, from
Gromov-Witten invariants, and from deformations of singularities.
     (iii) In examples one sometimes encounters F-bundles which have additional tame poles along
divisors in B. So, in practice, it is sometimes necessary to work with logarithmic F-bundles,
i.e. with triples (H, ∇)/B in which B and H are as before but ∇ is a meromorphic flat connection
on H with poles at most at (B × {0}) ∪ (D × D), for some even strict normal crossings divisor
D ⊂ B. The logarithmic F-bundle condition then is that for all locally defined vector fields ξ on


                                                  17
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


B which are tangent to D the operators ∇u2 ∂u and ∇uξ should have no poles. Of course, if B is
a non-archimedean super manifold (rather than a germ) and (H, ∇)/B is a logarithmic F-bundle
with log poles along D we can eliminate the log singularity by simply puncturing B along D, i.e.
by restricting (H, ∇) to (B − D) × D. This is another advantage of the non-archimedean analytic
setting.

3.1.2   Variants: formal and complex analytic F -bundles
While historically prevalent in the mirror symmetry and Gromov-Witten literature, the complex
analytic or formal analogues of an F-bundle will not be useful for constructing birational invariants
directly. For disambiguation and ease of reference we will name these variants differently.
    Suppose B is a complex analytic super manifold or a germ of a complex analytic super manifold.
Let D denote a small analytic disk in C centered at zero, or the germ of C at zero, and let u denote
the coordinate on D. A complex analytic F-bundle consists of (H, ∇)/B where H is a complex
analytic super vector bundle on B × D and ∇ is a meromorphic flat connection on H with poles at
most at u = 0, such that for all locally defined vector fields on B, the operators ∇u2 ∂u and ∇uξ have
no poles. We will say that (H, ∇)/B is a logarithmic complex analytic F-bundle if B and H are
as before, and ∇ is a meromorphic flat connection on H with poles at most at (B × {0}) ∪ (D × D)
for some even strict normal crossings divisor D ⊂ B, such that for all locally defined vector fields ξ
on B which are tangent to D, we have that the operators ∇u2 ∂u and ∇uξ have no poles.
    To be consistent with the common mirror symmetry terminology from [48] or the singularity
theory terminology from [37] we will also call such a triple a (logarithmic) de Rham part of a
nc variation of Hodge structures or a (logarithmic) TE structure.
    Suppose B is a smooth formal super scheme over a field k, char(k) = 0. Then a formal F-bundle
defined over k consists of (H, ∇)/B, where H is a super vector bundle on B × Spf k[[u]] and ∇ is
a meromorphic flat connection on H with poles at most at u = 0, such that the operators ∇u2 ∂u
and ∇uξ have no poles. Similarly, a formal logarithmic F-bundle defined over k consists of
(H, ∇)/B with B and H as before, and ∇ a meromorphic flat connection on H with poles at most
along (B × {0}) ∪ (D × Spf k[[u]]) for an even strict normal crossing divisor D ⊂ B, and such that
for all locally defined vector fields ξ on B which are tangent to D, we have that the operators ∇u2 ∂u
and ∇uξ have no poles.

3.2     Operations on F -bundles
For a given base B, F-bundles over B form a category Fbun(B) which is a k-linear, additive, Karoubi
closed tensor category with duals. The unit object in the category Fbun(B) is the trivialized rank 1
bundle on B with the trivial connection. Note that the category Fbun(B) is not abelian, it is only
quasi-abelian (hence an exact category). An example of a morphism in Fbun(Sp k) without an
adequate kernel is the operator of multiplication by u:

                                              1                           1
                                                                         
                     u·(−)
       O, ∇∂u = ∂u −−−→ O, ∇∂u = ∂u −            ,     u · ∂u (f ) = ∂u −     (uf ) ∀f ∈ k[[u]]
                                             u                            u

For any map ϕ : B ′ → B, and any F-bundle (H, ∇)/B over B as above, we define the pullback to be
the F-bundle over B ′ given by (B ′ , ϕe∗ H, ϕe∗ (∇)) where φ
                                                            e is φ × idD . The pullback is an exact tensor
functor from Fbun(B) to Fbun(B ′ ).


                                                   18
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Definition 3.3. For two F-bundles (B1 , H1 , ∇1 ) and (B2 , H2 , ∇2 ), we define their external sum
to be the F-bundle over B1 × B2 given by
          (B1 , H1 , ∇1 ) ⊞ (B2 , H2 , ∇2 ) := B1 × B2 , pr∗13 H1 ⊕ pr∗23 H2 , pr13
                                                                                 ∗
                                                                                    ∇1 ⊕ pr∗23 ∇2 ,
                                                                                                 

where pr13 and pr23 denote the projections from B1 × B2 × D to B1 × D and B2 × D respectively.
   Similarly, we define their external product to be the F-bundle over B1 × B2 as
      (B1 , H1 , ∇1 ) ⊠ (B2 , H2 , ∇2 ) := B1 × B2 , p∗13 H1 ⊗ p∗23 H2 , p∗13 ∇1 ⊗ id + id ⊗ p∗23 ∇2 .
                                                                                                    

Remark 3.4. One can define external sums and products of any finite collections of F-bundles. For
the external sums and products of finitely many copies of the same F-bundle, one can replace the
finite indexing set labeling the copies by a reduced finite scheme (or finite analytic space) over k, i.e.
by the finite set of its k-points endowed with the action of the Galois group Gal(k/k).

3.3     Natural symmetries of F -bundles
Write Aff(1) = Gm ⋉ Ga for the group of affine linear automorphisms of the analytic affine line A1,an
                                                                                                 k    .
The group Aff(1) × Ga acts on the category Fbun(B) of F-bundles over a base B as follows. We
denote elements in the group as triples (λ, c−2 , c−1 ) ∈ (Gm ⋉ Ga ) × Ga = Aff(1) × Ga .
   Dilation: The component λ ∈ Gm ⊂ Aff(1) acts on Fbun(B) by pullback via idB × dλ : B × D →
B × D, where dλ : u 7→ λu denotes the dilation of the coordinate u. We denote the action by Dλ .
    Exponential shift: The component c−2 ∈ Ga ⊂ Aff(1) acts on Fbun(B) by tensoring with the
rank-one F-bundle
                                                 c−2 
(3.5)                            B; OB×D , ∇ = d + 2 du .
                                                   u
We denote the action by Sc−2 .
                         e


    Power shift: The component c−1 in the second copy of Ga acts on Fbun(B) by tensoring with
the rank-one F-bundle
                                                   c−1 
(3.6)                            B; OB×D , ∇ = d +     du .
                                                     u
We denote the action by Sc−1 .
Remark 3.7. The exponential shift corresponds to multiplying the flat sections in an F-bundle
      c−2
with e u , and the power shift corresponds to multiplying with uc−1 , whence their names.

3.4     Maximal and overmaximal F -bundles
Let (H, ∇)/B be an F-bundle (resp. a logarithmic F-bundle with ∇ having log poles along an even
strict normal crossings divisor D ⊂ B). For any vector field ξ on B (resp. a vector field on B tangent
to D along D), the restriction of the operators ∇uξ to H|u=0 gives a map
             µ : TB −→ End(H|u=0 ),        respectively µ : TB (− log D) −→ End(H|u=0 ).
For any geometric point b in B, we have fiberwise maps
           µb : TB,b → End(H(b,0) ),       respectively µb : TB,b (− log D) −→ End(H(b,0) ).
The flatness of ∇ implies that the image of µb consists of commuting operators.


                                                   19
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


Definition 3.8. An F-bundle (H, ∇)/B over B is maximal (resp. over-maximal) at a geometric
point b ∈ B if there exists a cyclic vector for the action µb , i.e. a vector h ∈ H(b,0) such that the
map evh ◦ µb : TB,b → H(b,0) is an isomorphism (resp. epimorphism).
   Similarly a logarithmic F-bundle (H, ∇)/B over B is maximal (resp. over-maximal) at a
geometric point b ∈ B if there exists a cyclic vector for the action µb , i.e. a vector h ∈ H(b,0) such
that the map evh ◦ µb : TB,b (− log D) → H(b,0) is an isomorphism (resp. epimorphism).
   A (logarithmic) F-bundle is maximal (resp. over-maximal) if it is maximal (resp. over-maximal)
everywhere.
   Note that being maximal (resp. over-maximal) is an open condition. The significance of being
over-maximal or maximal is captured by the following
Lemma 3.9. For a F-bundle (H, ∇)/B which is over-maximal at b ∈ B, the image of µb is a unital
commutative associative super algebra over k, and the fiber H(b,0) is a free rank one module over
im µb ≃ TB,b / ker µb .
   Similarly, for a logarithmic F-bundle (H, ∇)/B which is over-maximal at b ∈ B, the image of
µb is a unital commutative associative super algebra over k, and the fiber H(b,0) is a free rank one
module over im µb ≃ TB,b (− log D)/ ker µb .
Proof. The claim in the lemma boils down to the following linear algebra statement: Let T and H
be k-vector spaces, and µ : T → End(H) a linear map satisfying the following conditions:
 (1) The image µ(T ) consists of commuting operators.
 (2) There is a vector h ∈ H such that the map evh ◦ µ : T → H is surjective.
Then µ(T ) ⊂ End(H) is a unital commutative associative subalgebra and H is a free rank one
module over µ(T ).
   To see that this statement holds we need to check that if A ∈ End(H) is an operator that
commutes with all elements in µ(T ), then A ∈ µ(T ). By Condition (2), there exists v ∈ T such that
Ah = µ(v)h. Then for any w ∈ T , by Condition (1) we have

                           Aµ(w)h = µ(w)Ah = µ(w)µ(v)h = µ(v)µ(w)h.

By Condition (2) again, we deduce that A = µ(v), in particular, A ∈ µ(T ).
    Note that for any v, w ∈ T , the product µ(v)µ(w) commutes with all elements in µ(T ), so it lies
in µ(T ) by the above reasoning. For the same reason, id ∈ µ(T ). Hence µ(T ) ⊂ End(H) is a unital
commutative associative subalgebra.
    By Condition (2), h ∈ H is a generator of H as µ(T )-module. For any A ∈ µ(T ), by Condition
(1), if Ah = 0, then for any v ∈ T , Aµ(v)h = µ(v)Ah = 0, so A = 0 by Condition (2). Therefore, H
is a free rank one module over µ(T ) generated by h. This completes the proof of the lemma.
    For an overmaximal F-bundle (H, ∇)/B the subbundle ker µ of the tangent bundle TB is an
integrable distribution on B, i.e. it defines a foliation R on B. We will call R = ker µ the redundancy
foliation of the overmaximal F-bundle (H, ∇)/B.
Lemma 3.10. Suppose (H, ∇)/B is an overmaximal F-bundle. Then for any rigid point b ∈ B,
locally near b the F-bundle (H, ∇)/B is pullback of a maximal F-bundle on a non-archimedean analytic
super manifold which is a transversal slice of the redundancy foliation R through b. Equivalently,
globally (H, ∇)/B is a pullback of a maximal formal F-bundle on the formal stack M := [B/R] of
leaves of R.


                                                  20
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Proof. A vector field ξ on B lies in the sub bundle ker µ if and only if the operator ∇ξ is regular
(i.e. has no poles) along u = 0. If ξ1 , ξ2 are two such vector fields, then so is [ξ1 , ξ2 ], because

                                             ∇[ξ1 ,ξ2 ] = [∇ξ1 , ∇ξ2 ]

by the flatness of ∇.
    By construction, along the leaves of the foliation R, the connection ∇ is regular at u = 0. So it
trivializes the bundle H along the leaves. This implies the second statement.

   Let (H, ∇)/B be a maximal F-bundle (resp. maximal logarithmic F-bundle) over B. It follows
from Lemma 3.9 that the tangent bundle TB (resp. the logarithmic tangent bundle TB (− log D))
inherits the structure of a unital commutative associative superalgebra from its embedding in
End (Hu=0 ).

Definition 3.11. We denote the induced product by ◦ and call it the Frobenius product
associated with the maximal F-bundle.

Definition 3.12. Let (H, ∇)/B be a maximal F-bundle (resp. maximal logarithmic F-bundle) on
B. The Euler vector field of (H, ∇)/B is the unique even vector field Eu on B which under the
action µ maps to the residual endomorphism κ := ∇u2 ∂u |H|u=0 of H|u=0 associated with (H, ∇)/B,
that is µ(Eu) = κ. In the logarithmic case Eu is automatically a section in TB (− log D) ⊂ TB .

    The definition makes sense because operator κ commutes with the all operators from µ(TB ), as
follows from the flatness of ∇.

Remark 3.13. (a) If (H, ∇)/B is not maximal but just overmaximal, then we still get a sheaf
µ(TB ) = TB /R of unital, associative, supercommutative algebras on B, where again the product
structure on µ(TB ) is inherited from the product of endomorphisms, through the embedding
µ(TB ) ⊂ End (Hu=0 ). Furthermore, H|u = 0 is a locally free µ(TB )-module of rank one.
(b) Suppose now (H, ∇)/B is an overmaximal F-bundle which has a global cyclic vector2 h ∈
Γ(B, H|u=0 ), then evh : µ(TB ) ∼
                                = H|u=0 is an isomorphism of coherent sheaves, which is compatible
with the µ(TB )-actions on source and target.
      Transporting the product on µ(TB ) via evh gives an assoicuative supercommutative product
on H|u=0 which we will again denote by ◦. The image of the operator κ ∈ Γ(B, µ(TB )) via this
isomorphism is an element in evh (κ) ∈ Γ(B, H|u=0 ), which we will again denote by Eu and will call
the Euler element (or section) associated with (H, ∇)/B. By construction we have κ = Eu ◦(−),
and when (H, ∇)/B, this is precisely the Euler vector field defined above.

    The Euler vector field interacts in an interesting way with the Frobenius product on TB . Indeed,
using ◦ we can define an infinite sequence of vector fields on B by taking powers of Eu with respect
to ◦:
                                        Eu0 = 1B := unit for ◦,
                                           Eu1 = Eu
                                           Euk = Eu
                                                 | ◦ Eu {z
                                                        ◦ · · · ◦ Eu}
                                                         k times

  2 For instance, the A-model F-bundle we consider in the next section is of this type.




                                                        21
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


The reasoning of [60, Proposition 3.6.2,Theorem 5.6] shows that the vector fields {Euk }k≥0 give an
action of the Witt Lie algebra k[t]∂t on B:

          ∀k, l ⩾ 0 :   [Euk , Eul ] = (l − k) Euk+l−1      (cf. [tk ∂t , tl ∂t ] = (l − k)tk+l−1 ∂t ).

The analogue of Remark 2.4 holds in this setting as well.
Remark 3.14. let (H, ∇)/B be a maximal F-bundle, and let b ∈ B ev ⊂ B be a rigid even point of
B. Then there exists a unique
                              germ W ⊂ B ev at b of a purely even closed analytic submanifold
in B s.t. spank {Euw }k≥0 = TW,w for all w ∈ W close to b. The number of distinct eigenvalues
                    k

of κ|W : TW → TW and the list of their multiplicities are constant on a neighborhood of b ∈ W .
Moreover, more fine results can be proved, like, e.g., if (H, ∇)/B is of exponential type (see [48] for
the definition of exponential type) at some point of W , then it is of exponential type at all points
of W . This implies that the isomorphism classes of formal mermorphic connections with regular
singularities over Spf k[[u]] corresponding to the eigenvalues of κ|W via Hukuhara-Levelt-Turrittin
decomposition are constant along W .

3.5     The A-model F -bundle
In this section we will describe the main example of the paper: the F-bundle underlying the A-model
variation of nc-Hodge structures. We start with the formal picture, which we subsequently modify
to get the non-archimedean analytic version which we will use in the applications.

3.5.1   Formal logarithmic A-model F -bundles
Fix an algebraically closed field K = K of characteristic zero and let X be a smooth projective
variety over K. Gromov-Witten classes are cohomology classes of algebraic cycles, so to talk about
them we have to fix a cohomology theory. For convenience, in this section we will workk with de
Rham cohomology since it does not depend on any external choices. Later on we will study the
dependence on the choice of cohomology theory more carefully.
    As in the complex analytic setting, for every n ∈ Z≥0 , and every

                      1 (X) = CH1 (X)/∼hom = im CH1 (X) → HdR
               β ∈ CHhom                                                      (X/K)
                                                                    2 dim X−2
                                                                                   

we will write                                                    Z
                                δ(n, β) = n + (dim X − 3) +           c1 (TX )
                                                                  β

for the expected dimension of the moduli stack M0,n (X, β) parametrizing stable genus zero n-marked
maps to X. Concretely M0,n (X, β) is the moduli of maps φ : (C, p1 , . . . , pn ) → X, where:
   (1) C is a connected nodal, genus 0 curve, defined over K.
   (2) p1 , . . . , pn are distinct smooth K-points of C.
   (3) φ is a morphism satisfying φ∗ [C] = β and the stability condition that if φ contracts a
component of C to a point, then the number of marked points and nodes on this component is ≥ 3.
The stack M0,n (X, β) is a proper Deligne-Mumford stack/K. It is equipped (see [52, 10, 11]) with a
virtual fundamental cycle class

                               M0,n (X, β) vir ∈ CHδ(n,β) M0,n (X, β)
                                                                   


                                                    22
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


of dimension δ(n, β), which further maps to a virtual fundamental class modulo homological
equivalence
                                        hom
                             M0,n (X, β) vir ∈ CHhom
                                                 δ(n,β) M0,n (X, β)
                                                                   

We consider the Gromov-Witten cycle class In,β (X) defined as the image
                                            hom
                  In,β (X) = ev∗ M0,n (X, β) vir ∈ CHhom      ×n
                                                                
                                                     δ(n,β) X      ⊗Q
                                                                2n dim X−2δ(n,β)
                                                           ⊂ HdR                     (X ×n /K)

under the natural evaluation map

                ev : M0,n (X, β) → X ×n ,       (C, p1 , . . . , pn , φ) 7→ (φ(p1 ), . . . , φ(pn )).

Similarly, if J is any finite set of cardinality n, we can consider the moduli stack of genus zero stable
maps with marked points labeled      by the elements in J, and define in the same way Gromov-Witten
classes IJ,β (X) ∈ CHhomδ(n,β) X
                                  J
                                     ⊗ Q.
Properties of the Gromov-Witten classes [52]:
(i) In,β (X) ̸= 0 implies that β is the class of an effective one cycle. For future reference we will
write c.
(ii) When β = 0, then In,0 (X) ̸= 0 implies that n = 3, and I3,0 (X) = (X ,→ X ×3 )∗ [X], where
X ,→ X ×3 is the diagonal embedding.
(iii) In,β (X) is invariant under the permutation action of the symmetric group Sn on X ×n . Thus,
for a finite set J of cardinality n, the class IJ,β (X) can be identified unambiguously with In,β (X).
Indeed, any ordering of the elements in J identifies IJ,β (X) with In,β (X) and the Sn -invariance
guarantees that this identification is independent of the choice of order.
(iv) In,β (X) satisfy the unit and divisor axioms. To state these tersely we will introduce some
notation. Suppose Rn, m ≥ 0 are integers and let ξ ∈ CHhom
                                                       • (X
                                                            ×(n+m)
                                                                   ) and η ∈ CHhom, • (X ×m ). We
define a new class ξ η ∈ CH• (X ) by setting
                            hom    ×n

                   Z                                                      ∗ 
                         η =       X ×(n+m) → X ×n         ξ ⌢ X ×(n+m) → X ×m η
                     ξ                               ∗


where X ×(n+m) → X ×n is the projection on the first n factors and X ×(n+m) → X ×m is the
projection the last m factors. With this notation we can now state that Iβ,n (X) satisfy the following
two axioms:

(Unit axiom) For all n ≥ 0, and β ̸= 0 we have In+1,β (X) 1X = 0 ∈ CHhom           • (X
                                                                                          ×n
                                                                                             ), where
                                                        R

      1X ∈ CHhom, • (X) denotes the unit.

(Divisor axiom) For any line bundle L on X we have
                     Z                  Z       
                               c1 (L) =    c1 (L) · In,β (X) ∈ CHhom
                                                                 • (X
                                                                      ×n
                                                                         ).
                           In+1,β (X)            β


                                                      23
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


(v) For all n ≥ 4 and all β the Gromov-Witten classes obey the Witten-Dijkgraaf-Verlinde-
Verlinde (WDVV) equation:
          X                         Z                  h diag       i
                                                        X −→ X × X     =
          β=β1 +β2
                        I                    (X)×I{3,4}⊔J2 ⊔{right},β2 (X)
      {5,6,...,n}=J1 ⊔J2 {1,2}⊔J1 ⊔{left},β1
                                   X                                   Z                            h diag      i
                         −                                                                           X −→ X × X
                                 β=β1 +β2
                                               I                    (X)×I{2,4}⊔J2 ⊔{right},β2 (X)
                             {5,6,...,n}=J1 ⊔J2 {1,3}⊔J1 ⊔{left},β1

                                                     diag
Here, we are capping with the class [X → X × X] ∈ CHdim X (X × X) of the diagonal in the
Cartesian square X × X which parametrizes the pairs of points with labels (left, right).
Remark 3.15. If X is a smooth projective variety defined over an arbitrary field K of characteristic
zero, then by the above procedure, we can construct Gromov-Witten classes

                                     In,β (X ⊗ K) ∈ CHhom
                                                      δ(n,β) (X
                                                                ×n
                                                                   ⊗ K) ⊗ Q.

The construction is manifestly invariant under the action of the Galois group Gal(K/K), i.e. for
every g ∈ Gal(K/K) we have g∗ In,β (X ⊗ K) = In,g∗ β (X ⊗ K).

    One largely unexplored aspect of Gromov-Witten theory is its algebraic flexibility. The algebraic
nature of Gromov-Witten invariants makes them a powerful tool for encoding and analyzing cycle-
theoretic and motivic information. Above we summarized the constructions and properties of
Gromov-Witten invariants in the classical setting where we were dealing with a variety over a field
of characteristic zero, and the homological equivalence was defined with respect to the algebraic de
Rham cohomology. For the applications to birational geometry, we would like to take full advantage
of this algebraic flexibility, and so we will need the following variant of Gromov-Witten invariants
which makes sense for arbitrary fields of definition and for homological equivalence extracted from a
cycle map to a reasonably general Weil cohomology theory.
Variant 3.16. Fix two fields K and k, both of characteristic zero. Let H • be a classical Weil
cohomology theory defined on non-empty smooth projective K-varieties, with values in k-vector
spaces (see e.g. [64, Definition 1.2.13] and [6, Section 45.7,tag 0FGS] for the definition).
Example 3.17. For us standard choices will be:
(a) (de Rham setting): K any field, char K = 0, k = K, and H • is de Rham cohomology over
k = K. That is for any non-empty smooth projective variety X over K we have H • (X) := HdR •
                                                                                               (X/k).
(b) (Dolbeault setting): K any field, char K = 0, k = K, and H (−) is the Dolbeault cohomology
                                                                 •

over k = K. That is, for any K-variety X we have H • (X) := HDol
                                                             •
                                                                 (X/k) = ⊕p,q H q (X, ΩpX/k ).
(c) (Betti setting): K ⊂ C, k = Q, and H • is the Betti cohomology of the associated complex
manifold. Indeed, for every K-variety X we set H • (X) = HB    •
                                                                  (X(C)an , Q), where X(C)an is the
complex analytic space of C-valued points of the base change X ×K C, taken with the complex
topology.
(d) (ℓ-adic setting): K any field of char K = 0, k = Qℓ , and H • (−) is the ℓ-adic cohomology. That
is, we fix an algebraic closure K ⊂ K, and for any K-variety X we set H • (X) = Hét  •
                                                                                       (X ×K K, Qℓ ) =
lim Hét (X ×K K, Z/ℓ Z) ⊗Zℓ Qℓ .
       •               k
←−


                                                             24
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


    To be specific, from now on we will focus on the Betti setting. Let X/K be a smooth projective
variety. Let, as above, K ⊂ K ⊂ C be the natural algebraic closure of K in C and let X = X ×K K :=
X ×Spec K Spec K denote the base change of X to K. The Chow group GH1 (X) of 1-dimensional
algebraic cycles on X maps by the cycle class map to the second singular homology H2 (X(C)an , Q)
of the associated complex manifold, and as above we set

                   1 (X) := CH1 (X)/∼hom = im [CH1 (X) → H2 (X(C) , Q)] .
                 CHhom                                           an


The group CHhom
              1 (X) is a subgroup of finite index in the group of all degree two rational homology
classes on X that pair integrally with the Néron-Severi lattice NS(X, Z) ⊂ HB    2
                                                                                   (X(C)an , Q). In
particular CH1 (X) ∼
             hom
                    = Zρ is a free abelian group of rank ρ equal to the Néron-Severi rank of X.
    Now, for any β ∈ CHhom
                         1 (X) we can follow the above procedure and define Gromov-Witten
cohomology classes
                                                                  2n−2δ(n,β)
                      In,β (X) ∈ CHhom
                                   δ(n,β) (X
                                             ×n
                                                ) ⊗ Q ⊂ HB                     (X ×n , Q).
The reasoning of [52] applies here and implies that these classes satisfy the properties (i)-(v).
     Note also that since Betti cohomology is a Weil cohomology theory, the Chow group inte-
gration defined in the description of property (iv) transfers verbatim to the cup product of
the associated cycle classes. Concretely, suppose Y is a smooth projective K-variety, and let
cl : CH• (Y ) = CHdim Y −• (Y ) → HB
                                   2 dim Y −2•
                                               (Y, Q) denote the cycle class map to Betti cohomology.
Now if ξ ∈ CH• (X ×(n+m) ) and η ∈ CH• (X ×n ) we will have
                      Z  Z
                          η =        cl(η) := (prn+m     )∗ cl(ξ) ⌣ (prn+m  )∗ cl(η) ,
                                                                                    
                   cl                                n                 m
                        ξ        cl(ξ)

where prn+m
         n    : X ×(n+m) → X ×n and prn+m
                                        m   : X ×(n+m) → X ×m are the projections on the first n
and the last m factors respectively, (prm ) is the pullback map on HB
                                        n+m ∗                         •
                                                                        (−, Q), and (prn+m
                                                                                       n    )∗ is
the Gysin map on HB (−, Q) which is the adjoint to (prn ) with respect to the Poincaré pairing
                     •                                 n+m ∗

on HB•
       (−, Q).
    With all of this in place we can now describe the requisite formal logarithmic F-bundles. To
streamline the exposition we will focus on the case K = K ⊂ C, k of characteristic zero, and
H • = HB  •
            (−, k). The case of varieties over a subfield K ⊂ C which is not algebraically closed
is also interesting and we will discuss it in the next section. For now, assume K = K ⊂ C and
consider a smooth projective K-variety X. Fix a non-empty collection of ample classes ω1 , . . . , ωm in
CH1,hom (X) ⊂ H 2 (X) on X which are linearly independent over Q, and a collection {∆j } ⊂ H • (X)
of pure degree cohomology classes, which completes the collection ω1 , . . . , ωm to a graded basis of
the k-vector space H • (X). Let {qi }m
                                     i=1 ∪ {tj } be the dual linear coordinates on H (X). Focusing
                                                                                      •

on the Z/2-grading of H (X), i.e. remembering only the parity of the cohomological degree, we
                          •

can consider the associated super affine space aX := Spec (k[Sym(H • (X)∨ )]). Next we consider the
formal neighborhood of 0 ∈ aX . This is the smooth formal super scheme given by
                                          f
                                         BX := Spf k [[(qi ), (tj )]] ,
where all qi are even, and the tj ’s are even or odd depending on their cohomological degree.
   This geometric setting gives rise to an OB f -linear quantum cup product
                                                   X

                                                       ⊗2
                                          ⋆ : Hu=0
                                               f                f
                                                             → Hu=0


                                                       25
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


on the trivial vector bundle Hu=0
                              f
                                  = OB f ⊗k H • (X), which in the current context is defined by the
                                      X
formula
                                                                                                                ⊠n
                                         m
                                                    R
                                        XY                ωi       X 1 Z                                 X
(3.18)       γ1 ⋆ γ2 := γ1 ⌣ γ2 +                  qi β        ·                           γ1 ⊠ γ2 ⊠        tj ∆j    ,
                                                                         n!   In+3,β (X)
                                        β̸=0 i=1                   n≥0                                   j


where γ1 ⌣ γ2 is the classical cup product on H • (X), and the integrand is viewed as a class in
X × X × X ×n = X ×(n+2) . The properties of the Gromov-Witten classes listed above imply that ⋆
is an associative unital product which can be viewed as a deformation along BX    f
                                                                                    of the classical cup
product ⌣ on the closed fiber Hu=0 |qj =0,ti =0 = H (X).
                                  f                 •

     We will also consider the trivial bundle Hf := H • (X) ⊗ OB f ×Spf k[[u]] . By definition we have
                                                                 X
H |u=0 = Hu=0
   f          f
                   and also Hf = pr∗B f Hu=0
                                          f
                                              . In particular the quantum product pulls back via
                                            X
prB f to an OB f ×Spf k[[u]] -linear product on Hf which by abuse of notation we will also denote by
     X          X
⋆ : (Hf )⊗2 → Hf .
     Note
      Pm next that our choice of coordinates on aX gives an even, strict normal crossing divisor
d = i=1 di where di ⊂ aX is given by the equation qi = 0. This defines a natural log structure
on aX and hence on BX    f
                              where the corresponding logarithmic tangent bundles TaX (− log d) and
TB f (− log d) are spanned by the vector fields qi ∂qi , and ∂tj .
   X


    The quantum product now gives rise to a meromorphic connection on Hf := H • (X)⊗OB f ×Spf k[[u]]
                                                                                      X
defined by the formulas:

                         ∇f∂u           =   ∂u − u−2 (Eu ⋆ (−)) + u−1 Deg−dim
                                                                           2
                                                                              X·id
                                                                                   ,
(3.19)                   ∇fqi ∂q        =   qi ∂qi + u−1 (ωi ⋆ (−)) ,
                                    i

                         ∇f∂t           =   ∂tj + u−1 (∆j ⋆ (−)) ,
                                j



where Deg : Hf → Hf is the degree operator Deg = ⊕2a=0
                                                    dim X
                                                          a · idH a (X) and Eu denotes the Euler
vector field on BX , defined by
                 f


                                    Deg − 2 id                       ∼
(3.20)       Euγ = c1 (TX ) +                  (γ) ∈ (Hu=0
                                                       f
                                                           )γ = Hγ×0
                                                                 f
                                                                         f ,γ (− log d) ⊂ TB f ,γ .
                                                                     = TBX
                                        2                                                   X



Remark 3.21. Here we have adopted a different convention than the one used in [48] to describe
the quantum connection. Specifically, the parameter u used here and the parameter (also called u)
used in [48, Section 3.1] differ by a minus sign. If we set q = q1 and if in the formula (3.19) we make
the change of variable u 7→ −u, then the restriction of ∇f to the purely even formal submanifold
            f
Spf[[q]] ⊂ BX  reproduces the formula used to define the de Rham part of the one parameter A-model
variation of nc-Hodge structures in [48, Section 3.1]. In addition, note that there is a typo in the
description of the connection in [48, Section 3.1]: the class κX (used there to denote the Euler
vector field) is the first Chern class of the tangent bundle of X, and not the first Chern class of
the cotangent bundle, as written in [48, Section 3.1]. The formula (3.19) corrects this misprint and
agrees with the common usage. In particular it agrees with the formulas used to compute the Γ-class
correction in [48, Section 3.1], with the classical Dubrovin definition [26] of the quantum connection,
and with the standard description of the quantum connection used recently in [44, 67, 16, 38].


                                                                   26
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


    By definition now (Hf , ∇f )/BX f
                                       is a formal logarithmic F-bundle for the given logarithmic
structure on BX . Furthermore, the properties of the Gromov-Witten classes listed above, imply
                f

that (Hf , ∇f )/BXf
                    is a maximal formal logarithmic F-bundle, i.e. ∇f induces a unital associative
Frobenius product ◦ on TB f (− log d) together with an Euler vector field Eu ∈ Γ(BXf
                                                                                      , TB f (− log d))
                            X                                                             X
                                     f ∼
so that under the identification H = TB f (− log d) given by the frame (qi ∂qi , ∂tj ) the quantum
                                             X
product ⋆ is identified with the Frobenius product ◦, and the Euler vector field Eu is given by the
formula (3.20).
    For ease of reference we give the following
Definition 3.22. Fix K = K ⊂ C, k - a field of char k = 0, H • = HB       •
                                                                            (−, k). Let X be a smooth
projective variety, defined over K, and let {ωi }i=1 , and {∆j } as above. Then the formal A-
                                                    m

model F-bundle associated with (X, ω1 , . . . , ωm ) is the formal logarithmic F-bundle (Hf , ∇f )/BXf
                                                                                                       ,
where BX is the formal neighborhood of 0 in the superscheme aX = Spec k [Sym (H (X) )],
         f                                                                                    •    ∨

Hf = OB f ⊗ H • (X), and ∇ is given by (3.19).
          X


Remark 3.23. Traditionally, the quantum product is defined by the series (3.18) in which the sum
is taken over all monomials q β in the monoid algebra k[NE(X, Z)]. In the above construction we
restricted our attention only to monomials corresponding to a finite simplical cone of ample classes,
so that we can work with formal power series rather than general elements in a Novikov ring, and so
that we can control the logarithmic structures explicitly. We will come back to the issue of general
versus restricted quantum products when we discuss the A-model analytic F-bundles in Section 3.5.2
and the analytic F-bundle version of the blowup formula in Section 4.2.
Remark 3.24. At a first glance this definition will not provide a very good invariant of a projective
K-variety X, as it seem to depend on several additional choices. However, this dependency on
choices is very mild and can be disregarded. Indeed
    (a) The first issue is that even when we fix the ample classes ωi the definition of ∇f seem to
depend on the choice of the ∆j ’s that complete the ample ωi ’s to a graded basis of H • (X). This
is a mild problem since a different choice ∆    e j of ∆j ’s will be related to the original choice by a
graded linear automorphism of H and this linear automorphism will induce an automorphism
                                     •

of aX and a posteriori of the pair (BX   f
                                           , Hf ). The induced automorphism of aX acts trivially on
the divisor d ⊂ aX and thus preserves the logarithmic structure of BX      f
                                                                             . Also, by construction, the
automorphism of (BX , H ) pulls back the logarithmic connection ∇ defined in terms of the ∆j to the
                     f    f

logarithmic connection ∇ e f defined via the ∆e j . Thus the two A-model F-bundles for (X, ω1 , . . . , ωm )
that arise from the choices of {∆j } and {∆j } are naturally isomorphic.
                                              e
     (b) The second issue with Definition 3.22 is the explicit dependence on the choice of ample classes
ω1 , . . . , ωm . One way to get around this is to work with a maximal collection of such ωi , i.e. choose
a basis of the rational Néron-Severi group CH1,hom (X) ⊗ Q that consists of ample classes. Indeed,
any two maximal collections of ample classes will be related by a change of basis automorphism of
H • (X). Therefore, the contribution of a monomial in q-coordinates for one picture coincides with
the contribution of the corresponding monomial in another picture. Therefore, there is no loss of
information for going between one basis to another.
    (c) The independence of the choice of ample classes can be refined further by noticing that
the formal A-model F-bundle corresponding to (X, ω1 , . . . , ωm ) and the formal A-model F-bundle
corresponding to (X, ω1 ) contain the same information, i.e. can be reconstructed from one another,
see [38, Lemma 2.24].


                                                    27
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


    The formal logarithmic A-model F-bundle (Hf , ∇f )/BX
                                                        f
                                                          we just described, captures the motivic
and Gromov-Witten information about X that we need. However the logarithmic structures and
the formal variables make these F-bundles awkward to manipulate. We will circumvent this by
repackaging the data encoded in (Hf , ∇f )/BX
                                            f
                                              into convergent non-archimedean analytic data, i.e.
into a non-archimedean, analytic F-bundle.

3.5.2   Non-archimedean A-model F -bundles
We will use the Betti setup from the previous subsection. Fix two fields K ⊂ C and k, with
char k = 0, and the Weil cohomology theory H • = HB •
                                                      (−, k). We will also fix an algebraically closed
non-archimedean field k ⊃ k, such that the valuation v : k → R ∪ {∞} is trivial on k. A convenient
choice is k = k((yQ )).

3.5.2.1 The case of varieties over K. Let X/K be a smooth projective variety, and let
H • (X) = HB  •
                (X(C)an , k). Let N1 (X, Z) = CHhom1 (X) denote the group of classes of curves in
X modulo Betti homological equivalence, and let NE(X, Z) ⊂ N1 (X, Z) be the the monoid of
effective curve classes in X.
    Consider the monoid algebra k[NE(X, Z)], i.e. the commutative unital k-algebra, whose underlying
k-vector space has a basis labeled by the elements in NE(X, Z), with a product given by the additive
semigroup operation. Concretely, we will write q β for the basis vector labeled by β ∈ k[NE(X, Z)]
and will call q β the standard monomial corresponding to β. Thus we have
                                                         M
                                   k[NE(X, Z)] =                 k · qβ ,
                                                     β∈NE(X,Z)


as a k-vector space, with a unit 1 = q 0 , and multiplication given by q β1 q β2 := q β1 +β2 . Write
k[[q]] = k[[NE(X, Z)]] for the completion of k[NE(X, Z)] along its maximal monomial ideal, i.e. the
ideal generated by q β , with β ̸= 0 ∈ NE(X, Z).
    Let {Ti }i=0,...,r be a homogeneous basis of the k-vector space H • (X), such that T0 = 1 ∈ H 0 (X) is
the unit in the cohomology algebra H • (X), and such that the degree two basis vectors spanning H 2 (X)
are chosen by first chosing separately bases of the subspace H 2 (X)alg := CH1,hom (X) ⊗ k ⊂ H 2 (X)
and of the subspace H 2 (X)trans of all transcendental classes in H 2 (X), i.e. all classes orthogonal with
respect to the intersection pairing to cycle classes of algebraic curves. Let (ti ) be the corresponding
system of k-linear coordinates on H • (X).
   Given n ≥ 0, β ∈ NE(X, Z), and classes γ1 , . . . , γn ∈ H • (X), we will write
                                     Z
                  ⟨γ1 · · · γn ⟩β :=       γ1 ⊠ · · · ⊠ γn ∈ k = H 0 (X ×n ),
                                        In,β (X)


for the corresponding correlator. Equivalently, by the Künneth and Poincaré duality properties of
H • we have
                        ⟨γ1 · · · γn ⟩β := (In,β (X) , pr∗1 γ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ pr∗n γn ) ,

where we still write (−, −) for the Poincaré pairing on X ×n .



                                                    28
     Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Definition 3.25. The H • -valued genus 0 Gromov-Witten potential of X is the formal power
series with k[[q]] coefficients in the set of super variables t0 , . . . , tr :
                              X           qβ X
(3.26)       Φ(q; t) :=                               ⟨Ti1 · · · Tin ⟩β ti1 · · · tin ∈ k[[q]][[t0 , . . . , tr ]].
                                          n! i ,...,i
                          n≥0,β∈NE(X,Z)        1     n



Notation 3.27. Here k[[q]][[t0 , . . . , tr ]] ∼
                                               = k[[NE(X, Z)]] ⊗ d H • (X)∨ is a coordinatized version of
                                                               b Sym
the big Novikov ring for X and we will sometimes denote it by NovX .

    Note that by the unit axiom, the variable t0 appears only in the terms with β = 0 and n ≤ 3. In
particular Φ is polynomial in t0 .
    Recall that a formal power series in a set of super variables is a usual formal series in even
variables with coefficients in the exterior algebra of the odd variables. For the moment we view Φ
as an R-valued function on the formal super scheme/k which is the formal neighborhood of some
(closed, even) base point of the algebraic super scheme Spec k[{ti }] whose k-points give the super
vector space H • (X). The third derivative ∂ 3 Φ/∂ta ∂tb ∂tc of Φ in the coordinates t0 , . . . , tr defines
a linear map H • (X)⊗3 → NovX and, by the standard Gromov-Witten lore [52], after contraction
with the Poincaré pairing gives a quantum product

                                    ⋆ : H • (X)⊗2 → H • (X) ⊗k NovX ,

which is the general (unrestricted by a choice of {ωi }m
                                                       i=1 ) version of the product (3.18).

   Consider next the torsion free part NS(X, Z)tf := im CH1 (X) → H 2 (X) of the Néron-Severi
                                                                               

group of X. It is a free abelian group of finite rank ρ. Let

                                      Tk (X) := NS(X, Z)tf ⊗Z Gm,k

denote the split affine torus over k with cocharacter lattice NS(X, Z)tf and let Tk (X)an denote the
associated non-archimedean k-analytic torus. We can also consider the k-vector space NS(X, k) :=
NS(X, Z)tf ⊗Z k. By definition, the tangent space to Tk (X)an at each rigid point can be identified
canonically with NS(X, k).
    With this notation we now define the following analytic k-spaces:

 BX,q ⊂ Tk (X)an is the preimage of the ample cone in NS(X, R) under the valuation map
     Tk (X)an → NS(X, R). Note that by construction BX,q is an admissible open in Tk (X)an .
  ev
 BX,t is the product of an analytic affine line with an open unit polydisk, where the affine line has
     coordinate t0 , and the unit polydisk has coordinates ti corresponding to the basis vectors Ti
     with deg Ti ∈ {2, 4, 6, . . .}.
  ev
 BX,t  is the product of the analytic affine line with coordinate t0 and a unit polydisk with coordinates
      ti corresponding to basis vectors Ti with deg Ti ∈ {4, 6, . . .}, and to basis vectors Ti ∈
      H 2 (X)transc whenever deg Ti = 2.
  odd
 BX    is the k-super analytic variety corresponding to the purely odd k-vector space H odd (X) ⊗k k,
     i.e. the super analytic variety whose underlying even analytic variety is a point and whose
     algebra of functions is the exterior algebra in the coordinates ti for deg Ti ∈ {1, 3, 5, . . . }.


                                                           29
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


   Set

(3.28)             BX := BX,q × BX,t
                                 ev     odd
                                     × BX                and BX := BX,q × BX,t
                                                                           ev     odd
                                                                               × BX   .

By definition BX is open in the k-super analytic variety Tk (X)an × (H • (X) ⊗k k)an and BX is
open in the k-super analytic variety Tk (X)an × ((H 2 (X)transc ⊕ H ∗̸=2 (X)) ⊗k k)an . Note that the
vector space inclusion map H 2 (X)transc ⊗k k ,→ H 2 (X) ⊗k k induces a closed analytic embedding
BX → BX of non-archimedean super analytic varieties.
   With this notation, we now have the following important observation

Lemma 3.29. The genus zero Gromov-Witten potential Φ(q, t) defines a k-valued analytic function
on BX .

Proof. Recall, that for any smooth projective K-variety X we can find a finite collection of ample
line bundles on X, so that their first Chern classes form a basis of the Q-Néron-Severi space
NS(X, Q) := CH1,hom (X) ⊗ Q ⊂ H 2 (X). Let L1 , . . . , Lm ∈ Pic(X) be such ample line bundles, and
write ωi := cl(c1 (Li )).
    Consider the open simplicial cone
                               ( m                 )
                                X
                          σ :=     ai ωi ai ∈ R>0        ⊂ Rω1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ Rωm .
                                  i=1

Let Bσ,q ⊂ NS(X, k) be the preimage of σ by the valuation map, and let Bσ := Bσ,q × BX,t          ev
                                                                                                     × BXodd
                                                                                                             .
Note that by definition Bσ ⊂ BX is an open analytic subvariety.
      Now note, that the formula for Φ defines a k-valued analytic function on Bσ . Indeed, let
q1 , . . . , qm be the coordinates on Tk (X) that are dual to the basis ω1 , . . . , ωm . Using qj and ti as
coordinates on the super analytic space Tk (X)an × (H • (X) ⊗k k)an we see that the restriction of
the formal germ (3.26) to the open Bσ is given by the power series
                      X 1 (β,ω )                 X
            Φ|Bσ =                     (β,ωm )
                           q1 1 · · · qm                ⟨Ti1 · · · Tin ⟩β ti1 · · · tin
                        n!                     i ,...,i
                     n≥0,β                           1     n

                                                                  ∈ k[[{qj }, {ti }]] ⊂ k[[{qj }, {ti }]].

This series is polynomial in t1 , and hence an analytic k-valued function on the non-archimedean
analytic super domain Bσ . Since the union of all such σ covers the ample cone of X, this implies
that Φ can be viewed as an analytic function on BX as claimed.

   Let as before D denote the germ at 0 of an analytic disk with coordinate u. Write OBX ×D for the
sheaf of analytic k-valued functions on the non-archimedean analytic supermanifold BX × D and let
H = H • (X) ⊗k OBX ×D be the trivial analytic vector bundle on BX × D with fiber H • (X) ⊗k k.
Note that our chosen basis of H • (X) gives a global frame of H, i.e. we have a canonical identification
H = ⊕ri=1 OBX ×D · Ti . The inverse (g ij ) of the Gram matrix of the Poincaré pairing gives a section
PD−1 ∈ H 0 (BX × D, H ⊗ H ). The section is constant in the frame {Ti } and therefore analytic.
   The third derivatives of Φ with respect to the coordinates {ti } define a map of analytic super
vector bundles
                                                              ∂3Φ
                            H ⊗3 → O,      Ta ⊗ Tb ⊗ Tc 7→
                                                           ∂ta ∂tb ∂tc

                                                         30
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


and the contraction of this map with PD−1 ∈ H ⊗2 gives an analytic quantum product
                                       ⋆:    H ⊗H            /H ,

which is independent of u and tautologically satisfies the properties (i)-(v).
   Furthermore, the quantum product ⋆ gives rise to a non-archimedean analytic quantum
connection ∇ : H → H ⊗ Ω1BX ×D [u, u−1 ] which over an open chart (Bσ , ({qj }, {ti }) is defined by
                                                             Deg − dim X · id
                         ∇∂u = ∂u − u−2 (Eu ⋆ (−)) + u−1                      ,
                                                                    2
(3.30)                  ∇∂qj = ∂qi + u−1 qj−1 (ωj ⋆ (−)) ,
                        ∇∂ti = ∂ti + u−1 (Ti ⋆ (−)) ,

Here again Deg : H → H is the degree operator Deg = ⊕2a=0      dim X
                                                                     a · idH a (X) and Eu denotes the
analytic Euler vector field, defined for every point γ ∈ Bσ ⊂ (H • (X) ⊗k k)an by
                                            Deg − 2 · id
(3.31)                   Euγ = c1 (TX ) +                (γ) ∈ TBσ ,γ ⊂ Hγ .
                                                2
    By construction (H , ∇)/BX is an over maximal F-bundle over BX and BX ⊂ BX is a closed
analytic subvariety which meets transversally every leaf through a rigid point of the redundancy
foliation of (H , ∇)/BX . Thus the restriction of (H , ∇)|BX ×D is the maximal F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX
over BX .
Definition 3.32. The F-bundle (H , ∇)/BX will be called the non-archimedean overmaximal
A-model F-bundle associated to X, K ⊂ C, k ⊃ k, and H • . The F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX will be
called the non-archimedean maximal A-model F-bundle associated to X, K ⊂ C, k ⊃ k,
and H • .
Remark 3.33. The analyticity of Φ implies that F-bundles (H , ∇)/BX and (H, ∇)/BX are
non-archimedean analytic in the sense of Definition 3.1.

3.5.2.2   The case of varieties over K. Fix two fields k and K, both of characteristic zero.

   3.5.2.2.1 Preliminaries on motives. Let C K be the category of pure André motives (aka
motivated motives) [3] of smooth projective K-varieties. This is a Q-linear, rigid, semisimple tensor
category which is defined unconditionally. For a K-variety X we will write h(X) for the associated
André motive.
   Fix an embedding K ⊂ C. Then we have a natural algebraic closure K ⊂ K ⊂ C of K inside C,
and a base change functor

                          (−) ×K K : C K −→ C K ,      h(X) 7→ h(X ×K K),
which by definition is a monoidal functor of Q-linear tensor categories.
   Taking Betti cohomology of the associated complex analytic space gives a Weil cohomology
theory on K-varieties [6]

(3.34)          •
               HB (−) : C K         / VectQ ,      h(X)            / H • ((X × C)an , Q) ,
                                                                       B       K



                                                  31
           Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


and by precomposing with base change gives also a compatible Weil cohomology theory on K-varieties
(3.35)
     •
    HB (−) : C K            / VectQ ,        h(X)             / h(X)               / H • ((X × C)an , Q)
                                                                                        B       K
                                                                    ||                             ||
                                                               h(X ×K K)                •
                                                                                       HB ((X ×K C)an , Q).


Abusing notation we denote both of these tensor functors by HB  •
                                                                  (−) since it will be clear from the
context which type of varieties serve as input of Betti cohomology.
   These data are conveniently encoded in certain proalgebraic groups.

(i) The automorphism groups GK and GK of the tensor functors (3.34) and (3.35) are the motivic
Galois groups of André motives of smooth projective K-varieties and K-varieties respectively.
GK and GK are proreductive algebraic group schemes over Q. Tannaka duality identifies C K and C K
with the categories RepQ (GK ) and RepQ (GK ) of representations of GK and GK on finite dimensional
Q-vector spaces.

(ii) The base change functor (−) ×K K : C K → C K induces a normal embedding GK → GK .

(iii) The quotient group scheme GK /GK is the automorphism group of the restriction of the functor
HB •
     (−) to the full tensor subcategory ArtK ⊂ C K of Artin motives, i.e. motives of zero dimensional
smooth projective varieties over K. In other words, GK /GK is the automorphism group of the
induced fiber functor
                               HB•
                                   (−)|ArtK = HB
                                               0
                                                 (−) : ArtK −→ VectQ .

This group is naturally identified with the Galois group Gal(K/K), where Gal(K/K) is viewed as a
profinite group scheme over Q for the trivial scheme structure.
   In summary, we have a short exact sequence


                    1            / GK             / GK             / Gal(K/K)                / 1


of proreductive group schemes3 over Q.

(iv) The group GK has a natural Lefschetz character GK → Gm given by its action on HB   2
                                                                                          (P1K , Q),
                                                   K
and we denote the kernel of this character by Mot . The restriction of the Lefschetz character to
GK is given by its action on HB
                              2
                                (P1K , Q) and we denote its kernel by MotK .

   Again MotK and MotK are proreductive algebraic groups over Q which we view as the motivic
Galois groups of the category of nc André motives. They can be interpreted as the Galois
groups of the semisimple Tannakian Q-linear categories C K /Tate and C K /Tate obtained as the orbit
categories of C K and C K for the action of the Tate twist.

    3 It is expected that GK is the connected component of the identity of GK or equivalently that Gal(K/K) = π (GK )
                                                                                                               0
is the component group of GK but we will not need this fact.


                                                         32
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


   Thus C K /Tate = RepQ (MotK ) and C K /Tate = RepQ (MotK ) and the quotient functors


                  CK              / C K /Tate       and      CK            / C K /Tate
                  ||                   ||                    ||                 ||
            RepQ (GK )         RepQ (MotK )               RepQ (G )
                                                                  K
                                                                           RepQ (MotK )


correspond to the pullback of representations via the inclusions MotK ⊂ GK and MotK ⊂ GK .
(v) The induced functor ArtK ⊂ C K → C K /Tate from (Artin motives) to (André motives modulo
Tate twists), is still fully faithful and so the composed homomorphism of group schemes over Q

                                      MotK ⊂ GK → Gal(K/K)

is surjective. Thus Gal(K/K) can also be identified with the quotient group scheme MotK /MotK ,
i.e. we also have a short exact sequence


              1          / MotK                 / MotK        / Gal(K/K)             / 1 .


   Suppose that X is a smooth projective K-variety and let X = X ×K K be its base change to K.
By definition the Betti cohomologies of X and X have the same underlying rational vector space.
To distinguish notationally between the two Betti cohomology theories, our convention will be to
writ e HB•
           (X) for the Betti cohomology of X, viewed as a MotK -module, and will write HB
                                                                                        •
                                                                                          (X) for
                                            K
the Betti cohomology of X, viewed as a Mot -module.
  The Galois group Gal(K/K) acts on X by automorphisms, and so by pullback acts on the
maximal torsion free quotient

           NS(X, Z)tf := NS(X, Z)/(torsion) = im CH1 (X) → HB
                                                            2
                                                              ((X ×K C)an , Q)
                                                                              


of the Néron-Severi group of X. But NS(X, Z)tf is a free abelian group of finite rank ρ and hence
we get a homomorphism
                                                       ∼ GLρ (Z).
                           Gal(K/K) → GL (NS(X, Z)tf ) =

The image of this homomorphism is a finite subgroup of GL (NS(X, Z)tf ) ∼
                                                                        = GLρ (Z) which we will
denote by ΓX .
   Consider next the rational vector space
                                    2
                                   HB (X) = HB
                                             2
                                               ((X ×K C)an , Q).

It decomposes into a direct sum of natural subspaces

(3.36)                         2
                              HB (X) = HB
                                        2
                                          (X)alg ⊕ HB
                                                    2
                                                      (X)transc ,

where


                                                    33
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


   • HB
      2
        (X)alg = NS(X, Q) is the Néron-Severi subspace spanned by NS(X, Z)tf ,
   • HB
      2
        (X)trasc ⊂ HB
                    2
                      (X) is the subspace of classes orthogonal to algebraic curves in X.
                                                                                   K
If we view HB
            2
              (X) as a representation of MotK , then HB
                                                      2
                                                        (X)alg = HB
                                                                  2
                                                                    (X)Mot is just the space of
invariants, and HB
                 2
                   (X)transc is just the complementary MotK subrepresentation.
   More importantly, the MotK -action on HB
                                          2
                                            (X) = HB
                                                   2
                                                     (X) also respects the decomposition (3.36).
Proposition 3.37. (a) The natural action of MotK on HB
                                                     2
                                                       (X) respects the decomposition
(3.38)                             2
                                  HB (X) = HB
                                            2
                                              (X)alg ⊕ HB
                                                        2
                                                          (X)transc

(b) The induced action of MotK on HB
                                   2
                                     (X)alg factors through the homomorphism
                   MotK → Gal(K/K) → ΓX ⊂ GL(NS(X, Z)tf ⊂ GL(HB
                                                              2
                                                                (X)alg ).
Proof. The Galois group Gal(K/K) acts on the K-points of X and thus acts on the cohomology space
HB2
    (X). If L is a line bundle on X, then the image ℓ of c1 (L) ∈ CH1 (X) in HB
                                                                              2
                                                                                (X) is a motivated
cycle, and so is fixed by MotK . Therefore an element g ∈ MotK acts on ℓ ∈ HB
                                                                            2
                                                                              (X) through its image
g ∈ Gal(K/K), i.e. g(ℓ) = g(ℓ), where on the right hand side we use the natural action of Gal(K/K)
on HB 2
        (X). Since the action of any element of Gal(K/K) on X sends a divisor to a divisor, it follows
that the action of Gal(K/K) on HB    2
                                       (X) will preserve the subspace NS(X, Q) = HB 2
                                                                                      (X)alg . Hence
                    K
the action of Mot on HB (X) will preserve HB (X)alg . This proves that HB (X)alg is stable under
                           2                     2                          2

MotK and, since MotK acts trivially on HB   2
                                              (X)alg , this proves part (b) of the Proposition.
    To finish the proof of part (a) we need to check that HB  2
                                                                (X)transc is also stable under MotK . Let
OX (1) be a very ample line bundle on the K-variety X and let P ∈ HB       2
                                                                             (X) = HB 2
                                                                                        (X) be the image
of c1 (OX (1)) in Betti cohomology. The choice of OX (1) gives rise to a natural Q-valued symmetric
bilinear form
                                                                     Z
                ⟨ − , − ⟩ : HB (X) ⊗ HB (X) −→ Q,
                             2         2
                                                            ⟨α, β⟩ =     α ⌣ β ⌣ P d−2 ,
                                                                       X

where d is the dimension of X. Since P is the class of line bundle defined over K, this form is
invariant under the action of MotK . But for any ℓ ∈ HB     2
                                                              (X)alg ℓ · P d−2 is the class of an algebraic
curve in X, and so HB (X)transc ⊂ HB (X) is contained in the ⟨ − , − ⟩-orthogonal complement of
                        2                 2

HB 2
     (X)⊥
        alg of HB (X)alg ⊂ HB (X).
                 2             2

     On the other hand, if we write Prim2alg for the ⟨ − , − ⟩-orthogonal complement of P inside
HB (X)alg , then we know that ⟨P , P ⟩ > 0 by the ampleness of OX (1), and we know that the
   2

restriction of ⟨ − , − ⟩ to Prim2alg is negative definite by the Hodge index theorem for X ×K C. In
particular, the Q-valued form ⟨ − , − ⟩ is non-degenerate on the subspace HB       2
                                                                                     (X)alg ⊂ HB 2
                                                                                                   (X), and
so HB (X) = HB (X)alg ⊕ HB (X)alg . Thus HB (X)transc = HB (X)alg , and since the form ⟨ − , − ⟩
      2          2             2      ⊥            2                2    ⊥

is MotK -invariant, we conclude that HB     2
                                              (X)transc is MotK -stable. This concludes the proof of the
Proposition.

Notation 3.39. For disambiguation we will write HB     2
                                                         (X)K−alg and HB
                                                                       2
                                                                         (X)K−transc for the rational
                                                                   K
vector spaces HB (X)alg and HB (X)transc together with the Mot -actions given by part (a) of the
                2               2

previous proposition. Note that these MotK -representations are different from the representations
HB2
    (X)alg and HB2
                   (X)transc consisting of K-algebraic and K-transcendental classes respectively.


                                                    34
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


   3.5.2.2.2 The quantum comology algebra for varieties over K Let again X be a smooth
projective variety over K, and let X = X ×K K be its base change to Spec K. Consider the rational
vector space HB •
                  (X) together with its structure of a MotK -module.
   Let
                                   1 (X) = im CH1 (X) → H2 ((X ×K C) , Q)
                    NE(X, Z) ⊂ CHhom                                    an
                                                                            

denote the monoid of numerically effective curve classes in X, and let, as before, NovX denote the
big Novikov ring for X, i.e. the ring

                              NovX := Q[[NE(X, Z)]] ⊗   d H • (X)∨ ,
                                                    b Q Sym B

where Q[[NE(X, Z)]] is the completion of the monoid algebra Q[NE(X, Z)] in its maximal ideal
⟨q β |β ∈ NE(X, Z), β ̸= 0⟩, and similarly Sym
                                           d H • (X)∨ is the completion of the superalgebra of
                                               B
polynomials on HB (X) along the maximal ideal of the origin.
                  •

   The MotK -action on HB
                        •
                          (X) induces a canonical action on NovX , preserving the Q-algebra
structure of NovX . Here MotK acts trivially on the factor Q[[NE(X, Z)]] (since it acts trivially on
the classes of effective curves defined over K) and tautologically (i.e. by pullback) on the power
series algebra Sym
               d H • (X)∨ .
                      B
    As explained before, the HB•
                                 (−)-valued Gromov-Witten invariants of X equip the rational vector
space HB (X) with an associative, super commutative quantum product
         •


                             ⋆ : HB
                                  •
                                    (X) ⊗ HB
                                           •
                                             (X) −→ HB
                                                     •
                                                       (X) ⊗ NovX .

Furthermore, since the Gromov-Witten classes are cycle classes of K-rational algebraic cycles in
Cartesian powers of X, it follows that the quantum product ⋆ is MotK -equivariant for the natural
actions of MotK on HB  •
                         (X) and NovX .
    Since X arises as a basechange of a variety X over K, the rational vector space underlying HB•
                                                                                                   (X)
                                                                          K
is the same as HB (X) and is therefore also equipped with a natural Mot -action. Again this induces
                 •

a tautological action (pulling back formal germs of functions at the origin) of MotK on Sym
                                                                                        d H • (X)∨ .
                                                                                               B
          K                                                             d H • (X)∨ . Also MotK acts
As a Mot -module this completed algebra is simply the completion Sym           B
naturally on NE(X, Z) and the action factors through the homomorphism MotK ↠ ΓX , where the
action of ΓX on NE(X, Z) is dual to the action of ΓX on NS(X, Z)tf . This, in turn, induces an action
on the completed monoid algebra Q[[NE(X, Z)]] and hence an action on the Novikov ring. We will
write NovX for this MotK -equivariant algebra. Note that again NovX and NovX are the same as
Q-algebras (or een as Q-algebras equipped with a MotK -action), but that the action of MotK on
NovX depends on the K-model X.

Proposition 3.40. The quantum product viewed as map

(3.41)                        ⋆ : HB
                                   •
                                     (X) ⊗ HB
                                            •
                                              (X) −→ HB
                                                      •
                                                        (X) ⊗ NovX

is MotK -equivariant.

Proof. The Galois group Gal(K/K) acts on NE(X, Z) through its finite quotient Gal(K/K) ↠ ΓX .
Therefore the colimit of finite unions of ΓX -orbits in NE(X, Z) will be an ind-finite ind-affine smooth
semigroup K-scheme NE(X, Z) whose set of K-points is the semigroup of effective curve classes in X.


                                                  35
         Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


   For a K-variety X let us write h(X) ∈ ob C K for the corresponding André motive and similarly
h(X) ∈ C K for the André motive of the base changed variety. By taking filtered colimits, we can
then define h(NE(X, Z)) as a commutative algebra in the ind completed tensor category Ind C K of
ind objects in C K .
   For any ΓX -orbit o ⊂ NE(X, Z) of effective curve classes on X, and any n, the collection of
Gromov-Witten classes (In,β (X))β∈o can be viewed (see Remark 3.15) as a motivated cycle on the
K-scheme NE(X, Z) × X×n , i.e. as a map from the trivial motive
                     In,o : 1 −→ h NE(X, Z) × X×n = h (NE(X, Z)) ⊗    b h(X)⊗n
                                                    

in the category Ind C K . In particular, for every n = m + 3, after contracting with the Poincaré
pairing on h(X), we get a map in Ind C K :
                   ⋆m,o : 1 −→ h (NE(X, Z)) ⊗
                                            b h(X)∨⊗m ⊗ h(X)∨⊗2 ⊗ h(X)

which by construction is invariant under the action of Sm × S2 . This is the o-contribution to the
m-th homogeneous piece of the quantum product, realized as a map of André motives. Summing up
over all m and o we get the quantum product map in Ind C K :
              X      X          1
         ⋆ :=                     ⋆m,o : h(X)⊗2 −→ h(X) ⊗ h (NE(X, Z)) ⊗       Sym h(X)∨ .
                                                                             b d
                               m!
             m≥0 o∈NE(X,Z)/ΓX

Now applying the fiber functor HB •
                                    (−) : C K → VectQ and passing to the quotient by Tate twists
yields the statement of the Proposition.
    Next suppose G is a proreductive group over k and ϵG ∈ G is a fixed central element of order two.
The category of representations Repk (G) of G on finite dimensional G-vector spaces is a semisimple
k-linear tensor category which is naturally Z/2-graded by the eigenvalues of the action of ϵG .
    Suppose we are given a (G, ϵG )-symmetric Weil cohomology theory on K-varieties, i.e. a
tensor functor
                                                H•        / Repk (G),
(3.42)                              C K /Tate

of Z/2-graded categories, which commutes with duality.
    Through the identification C K /Tate ∼   = RepQ (MotK ) given by the fiber functor
[X] 7→ HB (X) we can view H as a functor h : RepQ (MotK ) → Repk (G) which respects Z/2-
         •                     •

gradings commutes with duality. With this definition we have a strictly commutative diagram of
functors
                                              H•    / Repk (G).
                                   C K /Tate
                                                      6
                                   •
                                  HB (−)
                                                      h
                                            K
                                  RepQ (Mot )

Applying H• to the André motive version of the quantum cohomology algebra we get a super
commutative, associative quantum product
(3.43)                    ⋆ : H• (X) ⊗ H• (X) −→ H• (X) ⊗k NovH• (X)
where to simplify notation we write H• (X) instead of H• ([X]). By definition we have


                                                 36
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


   • H• (X) = h(HB
                 •
                   (X)) is a Z/2-graded finite dimensional k-vector space equipped with an action
     of G;
   • NovH• (X) is a complete super commutative k-algebra equipped with an action of G;
   • ⋆ is the image of the quantum product (3.41) under the functor h.
Remark 3.44. The G-equivariant variant NovH• (X) of the big Novikov algebra is defined in the
obvious way. If we write M = ⟨q β | β ∈ NE(X, Z), β ̸= 0⟩ for the maxiimal ideal of the monoid
algebra Q[NE(X, Z)] and m ⊂ Sym HB •
                                     (X)∨ for the maximal ideal of the origin in the Q vector space
HB (X), then we have
  •

                                                    O
                   NovX = lim (Q[NE(X,          a
                                                  )    (Sym     •
                                                                  (X)∨
                                                                       )   b
                                                                             
                           −→
                                         Z)]/M               H B         /m    ,
                             a,b                            Q


as a limit of finite dimensional MotK -equivariant Q-algebras. Applying the functor h yields

                            h (Sym HB•
                                       (X)∨ ) /mb = (Symk H• (X)∨ ) /mbk ,
                                                 

where mk is the maximal ideal in the polynomial algebra Sym H• (X)∨ and the right hand side is
equipped with the action of G induced from the G action on H• (X).
   Thus we set
                                                      O
                NovH• (X) := lim   (Q[NE(X,       a
                                                    )     (Symk H• (X)∨ ) /mbk
                                                                               
                             −→
                                 h          Z)]/M
                               a,b                              k
                                                                !
                                                                    d d
                                                                    O               
                           =       lim
                                   −→
                                       h (Q[NE(X, Z)]/Ma )             Symk H• (X)∨
                                                                          k
                                     a

   To understand the G-equivariant k-algebra lim
                                             −→
                                                 h (Q[NE(X, Z)]/Ma ) better, we will we will need
                                                       a
to look at the way h transports the rational MotK -representations Q[NE(X, Z)]/Ma to k-linear
G-representations. The transport mechanism depends on a relationship between the two Galois
groups Gal(K/K) and Gal(k, k) which we describe next.

    3.5.2.2.3   Galois twists        Composing the functor h : RepQ (MotK ) → Repk (G) with the
inclusion
                                             
                           RepQ (Gal(K/K))                     /       RepQ (MotK )
                                         ||                                    ||
                                     Art      K                   /      K
                                                                         C /Tate

we get a tensor functor

(3.45)                               RepQ (Gal(K/K)) −→ Repk (G).

Hence, for any smooth projective K-variety X we can compose the pullback functor

                                     RepQ (ΓX ) −→ RepQ (Gal(K/K))


                                                       37
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


with the functor (3.45) to get a tensor functor

(3.46)                              hX : RepQ (ΓX ) −→ Repk (G).

Such a tensor functor can be viewed as homomorphism from G to a Gal(k/k)-twisted form of ΓX .
Indeed, let us fix an algebraic closure k ⊂ k. Suppose we are given a homomorphism of profinite
groups
                                         φ : Gal(k/k) → Γ.
Such a φ gives rise to

   (a) a tensor functor
                                       Fφ : RepQ (Γ) −→ Vectk ,
which to everty Q-representation λ : Γ → GL(V ) assigns the k-vector space
                                                    Gal(k/k)
                                           V ⊗Q k               ,

where Gal(k/k) acts on V via the homomorphism λ ◦ φ : Gal(k/k) → GL(V ), and acts on k
tautologically.

   (b) a φ-twisted (inner) form of Γ, i.e. a finite group scheme Γφ over Spec k, defined by

                                       Γφ := Spec k ×Ad ◦φ Γ.

   (c) A canonical functorial action

                                     canφ (λ) : Γφ → GL(Fφ (λ))

of Γφ on Fφ (λ) for all Q-representations λ : Γ → GL(V ) of Γ. The action canφ (λ) is the Gal(k/k)-
descent of the extension λ ⊗ k : Γ → GL(V ⊗ k) of λ by k-linearity.

   With this notation we have the following

Lemma 3.47. The assignment φ 7→ Fφ gives an equivalence of groupoids:

          group     homomorphisms
                                 
                                            tensor functors RepQ (Γ) → Vectk
                                                                            
        Gal(k/k) → Γ, with maps =   ∼
                                   −→ with maps given by isomorphisms .
          given by conjugation by
        
                                            of functors
          elements in Γ
Proof. We can construct the inverse functor as follows. Let ν : RepQ (Γ) → Vectk be a fiber functor
and let ω : RepQ (Γ) → VectQ denote the forgetful functor. By the classification [63, Theorem II.8.1] of
fiber functors in Tannaka duality, we know that the functor A 7→ Isom⊗ (ω ⊗ A, ν) from commutative
k-algebras to sets is represented by an affine scheme I(ω ⊗ k, ν) which is a right fppf torsor over Γ
viewed as a group scheme over k. Such torsors are classified by H 1 (Gal(k/k), Γ), i.e. the groupoid
of such torsors is the groupoid with objects given by Γ valued 1-cocycles of Gal(k/k) and morphisms
given by coboundaries. But the 1-cocyles are simply homomorphisms φ : Gal(k/k) → Γ and the
maps between cocycles are given by conjugations by elements in Γ. This proves the lemma.


                                                  38
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Remark 3.48. Let ν : RepQ (Γ) → Vectk . The group scheme I(ω ⊗ k, ν) ×Ad Γ of automorphisms of
the Γ-torsor I(ω ⊗ k, ν) is an inner twisted form of Γ as a group scheme over Spec k and I(ω ⊗ k, ν)
is a left fppf torsor over this group scheme. If ν corresponds to a homomorphism φ : Gal(k/k) → Γ,
then this group scheme is canonically identified with Γφ .
   The previous lemma has an obvious refinement. Indeed, suppose that in addition to the
homomorphism φ we are given also a homomorphism ψ : G → Γφ of group schemes over k.
Proposition with ψ gives a canonical action

                                   canφ (λ) ◦ ψ : G → GL(Fφ (λ))

of G on the k-vector space Fφ (λ). This gives rise to a tensor functor

                        Fφ,ψ : RepQ (Γ) −→ Repk (G),          λ 7→ canφ (λ) ◦ ψ.

Also, if γ ∈ Γ, and we consider the γ-conjugate homomorphism

                                  φγ := Adγ ◦ φ : Gal(k/k) → Γ,

then the inner automorphism
                                            Adγ : Γ → Γ
intertwines the Gal(k/k) action Ad ◦ φ on the source copy of Γ with the Gal(k/k) action Ad ◦ φγ on
the source copy of Γ.
    In particular Adγ : Γ → Γ, descends to a homomorphism
                                                          γ
                                          aγ : Γφ → Γφ

of finite group schemes over Spec k, and so we get an action of the group Γ on the set of pairs of
homomorphisms (φ, ψ) given by

(3.49)                                (φ, ψ) → (φγ , aγ ◦ ψ) .

   With this notations we now have the following
Lemma 3.50. the assignment (φ, ψ) 7→ Fφ,ψ gives an equivalence of groupoids:

                                               tensor functors RepQ (Γ) −→ Repk (G),
                                                                                   
                                     
     pairs of group homomorphisms        ∼
                                         =
                                        −→ with maps given by isomorphisms of  .
     (φ, ψ) with maps given by (3.49)
                                               functors.
Proof. As in the proof of Lemma 3.47 we can construct the inverse functor explicitly. If
ν : RepQ (Γ) → Repk (G) is a fiber functor, we can compose it with the forgetful functor
for : Repk (G) → Vectk to get a fiber functor for ◦ ν : RepQ (Γ) → Vectk . As in the proof of
Lemma 2.1 we consider the k-scheme I(ω ⊗ k, for ◦ ν). It is a right torsor over Γ viewed as a group
scheme over Spec k. By construction, the group scheme G acts on the left on I(ω ⊗ k, for ◦ ν) by
torsor automorphisms. In other words, we have a homomorphism from G to the group scheme
of torsor automorphisms of I(ω ⊗ k, for ◦ ν). As explained in Remark 3.48 this group scheme
I(ω ⊗ k, for ◦ ν) ×Ad Γ is an inner form of Γ as a group schem over Spec k, and when for ◦ ν = Fφ , it
is equal to the twist Γφ . Thus we get a homomorphism ψ : G → Γφ and an identification ν = Fφ,ψ .
This proves the lemma.


                                                 39
         Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


   Now observe that the MotK action on Q[NE(X, Z)]/Ma is induced from the MotK -action on
NE(X, Z) which, as we explained above, factors through the homormorphism MotK → Gal(K/K) →
ΓX and the natural action of ΓX on the lattice NE(X, Z) ∼ = Zρ . By the previous discussion, the
tensor functor
                                  hX : RepQ (ΓX ) → Repk (G)
corresponds to a pair of homomorphisms φ : Gal(k/k) → ΓX , and ψ : G → Γφ
                                                                        X . In particular we see
that as a k-vector space we have

                         lim
                         −→
                             h ((Q[NE(X, Z)) /Ma ) = k[[NE(X, Z)]]Gal(k/k) ,
                          a

where the Gal(k/k) acts tautologically on k and acts on NE(X, Z) via φ : Gal(k/k) → ΓX . The
action of G on k[[NE(X, Z)]]Gal(k/k) is given by the composition of ψ : G → Γφ
                                                                             X and the canonical
           φ
action of ΓX on k[[NE(X, Z)]] Gal(k/k)
                                       .

   3.5.2.2.4 Weil cohomology realization of the A-model F-bundle Suppose we are in
the above setup. That is we have two fields K and k, both of characteristic zero, and we have fixed
an inclusion K ⊂ C and an algebraic closure k ⊂ k. Let G be a given proreductive group over k
with a fixed central involution ϵG and suppose we are given a (G, ϵG )-symmetric Weil cohomology
theory on K-varieties, i.e. a tensor functor

                                   h : RepQ (MotK ) −→ Repk (G).

With these data we can associate a natural Z/2-graded k-vector space equipped with a G-action,
namely H• (X) := h(HB  •
                         (X)). This vector space will serve as a fiber of our F-bundle. As explained
in section 2, H (X) comes equipped with a super commutative, associative, G-equivariant quantum
               •

product (3.43).
    Recall that the Betti cohomology HB   •
                                            (X) is a Q-representation of MotK which decomposes
                                            K
naturally into a direct sum of rational Mot -subrepresentations
                                                                 ∗̸=2
                         •
                        HB (X) = HB
                                  2
                                    (X)K−alg ⊕ HB
                                                2
                                                  (X)K−transc ⊕ HB    (X).

so that the action of MotK on HB 2
                                   (X)K−alg factors through the finite quotient MotK ↠ ΓX .
    As explained in Section 2, the choice of the fiber functor h gives rise to a tensor functor

                                    hX : RepQ (ΓX ) −→ Repk (G),

which is equivalent to specifying a pair of homomorphisms φ : Gal(k/k) → ΓX and
ψ : G → Γφ
         X . Using this we define the following k-representations of G:

  • H2alg (X) := hX (HB
                      2
                        (X)K−alg ). Explicitly, this k-linear G-representation is given by the k-
    vector space (NS(X, Q) ⊗ k)Gal(k/k) , where the Gal(k/k)-action on NS(X, Q) is given by φ
    while the Gal(k/k)-action on k is tautological. The G-action on this vector space is given
    by the homomorphism ψ : G → Γφ                                     φ
                                          X and the natural action of ΓX on the vector space
    (NS(X, Q) ⊗ k)Gal(k/k) .
  • H2transc (X) := h HB (X)transc ⊂ H2
                       2
                                  


                                                 40
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication

                            
                     ∗̸=2
   • H∗̸=2 (X) := h HB    (X) .

   Altogether we get a decomposition of H• (X) as a direct sum of G-representations:

(3.51)                      H• (X) := H2alg (X) ⊕ H2transc (X) ⊕ H∗̸=2 (X).

Passing to analytizations and choosing suitable admissible domains in the pieces of this decomposition
will allow us to describe the base of the A-model F-bundle for X.
   Concretely, let

                     N1 (X, Z) = CHhom
                                   1 (X) = im CH1 → H2 ((X ×K C) , Q)
                                                                an
                                                                    

denote the group of cycle classes of algebraic curves in X. This is again a free abelian group of
rank ρ equipped with a ΓX -action. The cap product between singular homology and cohomology on
(X ×K C)an identifies the group N1 (X, Z) with the dual of the Néron-Severi lattice NS(X, Z)tf and
this identification is compatible with the natural ΓX -actions.
    Additionally, N1 (X, Z) contains the ΓX -stable sub semigroup

                                        NE(X, Z) ⊂ N1 (X, Z)

of numerically effective curve classes in X.
    The homomorphisms φ and ψ define a non-split affine torus T (X) over k on which G acts by
automorphisms. Here T (X) := (NS(X, Z)tf ⊗ Gm,k )Gal(k/k) , where Gm,k denotes the pullback of the
multiplicative group scheme to k, Gal(k/k) acts tautologically on Gm,k , and acts on NS(X, Z)tf via
the homomorphism φ : Gal(k/k) → ΓX . As a group scheme over k this torus is equipped with an
action of the finite group scheme Γφ                                                    φ
                                     X , and the G action on T (X) is given by ψ : G → ΓX .

    Now consider the non-archimedean field k((y)) of Laurent series in an auxilliary variable y. Let
Tk((y)) (X) denote the base change of T (X) to an affine (still non-split) torus over k((y)), and let
Tk((y)) (X)an be the non-archimedean analytification of the torus Tk((y)) (X). Following the same steps
as in the construction of the analytic A-model F-bundle for a variety over K, we define the following
rigid analytic spaces over k((y)):
 BX,q ⊂ Tk((y)) (X) is the preimage of the ample cone in NS(X, R) under the valuation map
       an
     Tk((y)) (X) → NS(X, R).
  ev
 BX,t is the product of the analytic affine line (H0 (X) ⊗ k((y)))an with an open unit polydisk in the
     analytification of the k((y))-affine space H2• ≥2 (X) ⊗ k((y))
  ev
 BX,t  is the product of the analytic affine line (H0 (X) ⊗ k((y)))an with an open unit polydisk in the
      analytification of the k((y))-affine space H2transc (X) ⊕ H2• >2 (X) ⊗k k((y)).
                                                                           

  odd
 BX   is the super analytic variety corresponding to the purely odd vector space
     Hodd (X) ⊗k k((y)).
Multiplying these together we get two k((y))-analytic spaces

                 BX := BX,q × BX,t
                               ev     odd
                                   × BX          and BX := BX,q × BX,t
                                                                   ev     odd
                                                                       × BX   ,


                                                  41
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


which are G-stable admissible opens in the k((y))-analytic varieties Tk((y)) (X)an × (H• (X) ⊗k k((y)))an
and Tk((y)) (X)an × ((H2 (X)transc ⊕ H•̸=2 (X)) ⊗k k((y)))an respectively. In particular, we can view
BX as a non-archimedean replacement of the formal scheme Spf NovX .
   Let D denote the germ at 0 in a k((y))-analytic disk with coordinate u. H denote the trivial
analytic super vector bundle on BX × D with fiber H• (X) ⊗ k((y)). Then, the same argument that
we used to prove Lemma 3.29 implies that the formal G-equivariant quantum product (3.43) defines
an analytic quantum product
                                     ⋆ : H ⊗ H −→ H
which is moreover independent of u. Using this product we again define a quantum connection, i.e.
a meromorphic flat connection ∇ on H given by the usual formulas

                       ∇u∂u = u∂u − u−1 Eu ⋆(−) + Gr,
                        ∇∂ti = ∂ti + u−1 Ti ⋆ (−),       for τ ∈ H• (X) ⊗ k((y)),
                       ∇ξq∂q = ξq∂q + u−1 ξ ⋆ (−),        for ξ ∈ H2 (X) ⊗ k((y)),

where Eu is the Euler vector field, Gr is the grading operator, and ξq∂q is the derivation of OBX
given by ξq∂q (q β ) = (β · ξ)q β .
   Again (H , ∇)/BX is an over maximal F-bundle over BX and BX ⊂ BX is a closed analytic
subvariety which meets transversally every leaf through a rigid point of the redundancy foliation of
(H , ∇)/BX . Thus the restriction of (H , ∇)|BX ×D is the associated maximal F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX
over BX .

Definition 3.52. The F-bundle (H , ∇)/BX will be called the non-archimedean overmaximal
A-model F-bundle associated to X, K, k, and H• . The F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX will be called the
non-archimedean maximal A-model F-bundle associated to X, K, k, and H• .

Remark 3.53. For the applications to atoms we will frequently base change the spaces BX and BX ,
and the corresponding F-bundles, to analytic spaces, and analytic F-bundles to an algebraically closed
field k containing k((y)), e.g. k = k((yQ )). We do this to ensure that the quantum multiplication
by the Euler vector field has well defined eigenvalues. If however the eigenvalues of Eu ⋆(−) exist
over k((y)) one can work with the analytic F-bundles over the smaller field k((y)) and get finer
obstructions to rationality. Note that the process of base changing to k definitely loses information,
e.g. the base changed torus Tk (X) is automatically split.


4     Decomposition theorems
In this section we discuss the basic decomposition theorems for F-bundles. First we recall the spectral
decomposition theorem, which works for arbitrary F-bundles. After that we discuss the blowup
and projective bundle decomposition theorems that are specific to A-model F-bundles associated to
smooth projective varieties.

4.1    Spectral decomposition theorem
Suppose k is a non-archimedean field of characteristic zero.


                                                   42
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Theorem 4.1. Let B be an admissible open neighborhood of a rigid point b in a k-analytic affine
        L let (H, ∇)/B be an F-bundle over B maximal at b. Assume that we have a decomposition
space, and
Hb,0 ≃ i∈I Hi stable under κb = Eub ◦(−), and that for any i ̸= j ∈ I, the spectra of κb |Hi and
κb |Hj are disjoint. Then there exists an admissible open neighborhood U of b such that the restricted
F-bundle (H, ∇)/U decomposes into an external sum of maximal F-bundles (Hi , ∇i )/Ui extending
the decomposition of Hb,0 .
Proof. See [38, Theorem 1.2].
Remark 4.2. The spectral decomposition theorem has obvious versions that hold for formal or
C-analytic F-bundles. Indeed, let (H, ∇)/B be a formal maximal F-bundle over an algebraically
closed field k of characteristic 0, let b ∈ B be a closed point, and let {λi (b)}si=1 ∈ k be the
distinct eigenvalues of κb . Then there exists a formal neighborhood U of b in B and maps
λi : U → Spf k[[t − λi (b)]], sending b to λi (b), so that λi are the distinct eigenvalues of κ|U , and
(H, ∇)/U decomposes canonically into an exterior sum of formal F bundles corresponding to the
generalized eigenbundles of κ|U . Similarly, if (H, ∇)/B is a de Rham part of a nc variation of Hodge
structures, i.e. a complex analytic F-bundle, then for any point b ∈ B there exist disjoint small disk
Di ⊂ C, centered at the distinct eigenvalues of κb , and C-analytic functions λi : U → Di ⊂ C from a
small neighborhood U of b in B, so that λi are the distinct eigenvalues of κU and a decomposition of
(H, ∇)/U into an external sum of F-bundles (Hi , ∇i )) /Ui where Ui is a complex manifold, (Hi , ∇i )
is a bundle with connection on Ui × Spf C[[u]], and the decomposition isomorphism is C-analytic in
the U direction and only formal in the u-direction.

4.2     The blowup formula
Let X be a smooth complex projective variety, and Z ⊂ X a smooth subvariety of pure codimension
r ≥ 2. Let X  b be the blowup of X along Z, and let X ′ be the disjoint union of X with (r − 1)
copies of Z. We have A-model maximal F-bundles (H,      b ∇)/B
                                                           b
                                                                 b , and (H , ∇ )/BX ′ . The blowup
                                                                 X
                                                                           ′    ′

decomposition theorem identifies the germs of these F-bundles at appropriately chosen base points.
It is extracted from Iritani’s blowup formula [44] which gives the same identification for the formal
A-model logarithmic F-bundles of X  b and X ′ .
    Before we give a precise formulation and proof of the blowup decomposition, let us look more
closely at its shape and structure. The blowup of Z in X gives rise to a standard fibered square

(4.3)                                         D
                                                    ȷ
                                                         /X
                                                          b
                                            πD              π
                                                          
                                              Z          /X
                                                    ı


where ı : Z ,→ X is the inclusion, π : X b → X is the blowup map, ȷ : D ,→ X      b is the exceptional
divisor, and πD : D = P(NZ/X ) → Z is the natural projection. Write n : H • (D, Z) → H • (D, Z)
for the operator of (classical) multiplication by c1 (OD (1)) = −c1 (ND/X b ). Then, there is a natural
identification of Z/2-graded cohomology spaces
                                         M             M      M
(4.4)         H • (X ′ , Q) = H • (X, Q)    H • (Z, Q)    ···    H • (Z, Q) f→ H • (X,
                                                                                    b Q)
                                            |             {z              }
                                                        (r−1)−copies


                                                   43
               Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


given by

                (α, β1 , . . . , βr−1 ) 7→ π ∗ (α) − ȷ∗ πD
                                                         ∗
                                                           (β1 ) − ȷ∗ nπD
                                                                        ∗
                                                                          (β2 ) − · · · − ȷ∗ nr−2 πD
                                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                                     (βr−1 ).

    To simplify the discussion suppose K = C, k = Q, k = Q((yQ )), H • (Y ) = HB•
                                                                                  (Y (C)an , Q) for any
complex projective manifold Y . Let Amp(Y ) = int(Nef(Y )) ⊂ H (Y, R) denote the ample cone of
                                                                  2

Y . Then for any point θ ∈ Amp(Y ) ∩ H 2 (X, Q) we get a rigid point in BY,q which is given by the
homomorphism NE(X, Z) → k× , β → y(β,θ) ∈ k× . We will denote this rigid point by yθ ∈ BY,q
    Let ω ∈ H 2 (X, Z) be an ample class on X, and let ω    b ∈ H 2( b
                                                                     X, Q) be a class of the form
ω
b  := ϵ φ ω − KX for some ϵ ∈ (0, 1) ∩ Q. For a small enough ϵ > 0 the class ω
       −1 ∗
                                                                                    b is ample on X.  b
Then for every positive ϵ ≪ 1 we can consider the point Q = y ∈ B b
                                                          b    ω
                                                               b
                                                                      X,q
                                                                          . This is a special point in
BX,q
  b   ⊂  BXb which is close to the boundary of the tube domain B X,q
                                                                 b   and   whose valuation is close to
∞.
   In the limit ϵ → 0 only stable maps that are vertical for the map π : X b → X contribute to the
quantum product on b X. Furthermore, in this limit, only points and vertical lines will contribute to
the quantum product and the contribution of lines will be yr−1 . Consider the operator κ   b which is
the quantum multiplication in H • ( b
                                   X, k) with the Euler vector field Eu b
                                                                       X,Qb , computed  at the special
point b
      Q. A direct calculation shows that in the limit ϵ → 0 the operator k  b has the following block
form with respect to the decomposition (4.4).
                  KX                                                                                         (r − 1)ı∗
                                                                                                                                 
                −(r − 1)ı∗    KZ − c1 (N )                                                           (r − 1)(yr−1 + cr−1 (N ))
                               −(r − 1)      KZ − c1 (N )                                                 (r − 1)cr−2 (N )
   b = 
                                                                                                                                
   κ                                          −(r − 1)      KZ − c1 (N )                                  (r − 1)cr−3 (N )       
                                                               ...           ...                                 ...
                                                                                                                                
                                                                           −(r − 1)   KZ − c1 (N )          (r − 1)c2 (N )
                                                                                       −(r − 1)         KZ + (r − 2)c1 (N )



   where N = NZ/X is the rank r normal bundle to Z in X, ı : Z ,→ X is the natural inclusion,
and each coefficient acts by classical multiplication on the cohomology of X.
                                                                           b

   This operator preserves the filtration H ≥• (X,  b k) by degree of cohomology and the associated
graded with respect to this filtration gives the operator
                              0                                                0
                                                                                     
                          −(r − 1)ı∗     0                                  (r − 1)Q
                                                                                   b
                 b =                 −(r − 1)    0                             0
                                                                                    
              gr κ                             −(r − 1)  0                      0
                                                                                     
                                                        ...   ...              ...
                                                                                    
                                                                              −(r − 1)      0           0
                                                                                         −(r − 1)       0


   This implies that the eigenvalues of κ
                                        b split into r clusters and each cluster is contained in a
small analytic disk in k so that:
   (1) The
        √
           disks are disjoint, one of them is centered at 0, while the rest are centered at
           π   −1(2j−1)
(r − 1)e        r−1       for j = 1, . . . , r − 1.
    (2) The sum of the generalized eigenspaces corresponding to the eigenvalues that are close to 0
give a super-vector space isomorphic to H • (X, k).
   (3) The sum of the generalized eigenspaces corresponding to the eigenvalues close to a rescaled
(m − 1)-st root of 1 give a super-vector space isomorphic to H • (Z, k).


                                                                 44
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


    By analytic continuation, this picture extends to an appropriate open domain in BX and yields
the desired blowup decomposition. To show rigorously that this reasoning identifies the A-model
F-bundles of Xb and X ′ we will have to identify the special point ω ′ in BX ′ which corresponds to
b . This is quite involved and requires a tricky inductive argument which we will not carry out
ω
here. Instead we will extract the blowup decomposition directly by using Iritani’s formal blowup
decomposition [44] and identifying big open subsets in BX  b and BX ′ where Iritani’s identification of
the F-bundles for X b and X ′ is actually analytic. It is also instructive to note that in the formal
setting the above clustering behavior of the eigenvalues is proven rigorously in Iritani’s theorem [44,
Theorem 5.8(6)].
   More precisely we have the following

Theorem 4.5. There is a canonical isomorphism of maximal F-bundles between ( b
                                                                             H, b∇) and (H′ , ∇′ ),
                        b in B and an analytic domain U ′ in BX ′ . The union of different choices
over an analytic domain U     X
                              b
   b is connected and nonempty, same for U ′ .
of U

Proof. We will deduce the explicit description of the domains and the isomorphism in the statement
of Theorem 4.5 from Iritani’s blowup formula [44]. First we have the following

Lemma 4.6. Let k be a field of characteristic zero. Let

                               φ : k[[x1 , . . . , xl ]] −→ k[p, p−1 ][[y1 , . . . , ym ]]

be a map of k-algebras. Write
                                         X          X
                              φ(xj ) =                       aji1 ,...,im y1i1 · · · ym
                                                                                      im λ
                                                                                        p .
                                         λ∈Z i1 ,...,im ∈N


Assume there exist constants α, β, γ, δ ∈ Z with α < 0 < β such that for every term y1i1 · · · ym
                                                                                                im λ
                                                                                                  p
with nonzero coefficient, we have
                                       αd + γ < λ < βd + δ,
where d = i1 + · · · + im is the total degree. Let k be an algebraically closed non-archimedean field
containing k, such that the absolute value restricted to k is trivial. Then after base change from k to
k, for any ϵ ∈ (0, 1), the map φ is convergent over the admissible domain given by |yi | ∈ [0, ϵ) for
                                1       1
i = 1, . . . , m and |p| ∈ (ϵ− 2α , ϵ− 2β ).

Proof. Since the coefficients aji1 ,...,im are in k, and the absolute value of k restricted to k is trivial,
it suffices to show that for terms y1i1 · · · ym   p with nonzero coefficients, ϵd · |p|λ → 0 as the powers
                                                im λ

tend to infinity.
    As λ → +∞, we have
                                                              λ        λ
                                         ϵd · |p|λ < ϵd · ϵ− 2β = ϵd− 2β ,
which converges to 0 since d − 2β
                                λ
                                  → +∞.
   As λ → −∞, we have
                                                       λ        λ
                                  ϵd · |p|λ < ϵd · ϵ− 2α = ϵd− 2α ,
which converges to 0 since d − 2α
                                λ
                                  → +∞. This completes the proof.


                                                          45
           Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


   To use Iritani’s formula from [44] to study the convergence of maps between analytic A-model
F-bundles, we will embed the requisite Novikov rings into power series rings.
   Let ı : Z → X denote the inclusion, φ : X  b → X the projection, D ⊂ X  b the exceptional divisor,
ρZ = c1 (NZ/X ), and λ the class of a line in the fiber of E → Z. Recall that r is the codimension of
Z ⊂ X. Following [44, (5.11)], we set
                                         (
                                           r−1        if r is even,
                                    s=
                                           2(r − 1) if r is odd.

As usual we will write N1 (X, Z) = CH1,num (X) = CH1,hom (X) for the torsion free part of the
Néron-Severi group of a smooth projective variety X/K.
       Choose a basis ω1 , . . . , ωl of the free abelian group N1 (X, Z), consisting of ample classes, such
that the pullbacks ı∗ ω1 , . . . , ı∗ ωl ∈ N1 (Z, Z) are contained in a simplicial cone spanned by a basis
ω1′ , . . . , ωm
               ′
                 of N1 (Z, Z) consisting of ample classes. This is possible by choosing ω1 , . . . , ωl sufficient
close to a fixed ray in the ample cone of X.
      Then we obtain a dual basis β1′ , . . . , βm   ′
                                                       ∈ N1 (Z, Z) such that NE(Z, Z) is contained in Cone(β1′ ,
. . . , βm ), as well as a dual basis β1 , . . . , βl ∈ N1 (X, Z) such that Cone(β1 , . . . , βl ) contains NE(X, Z)
          ′

and ı∗ βi′ for i = 1, . . . , m.

Lemma 4.7. For i = 1, . . . , l, there exists a constant ci ∈ Z>0 such that for βei := βi − ci λ, we have
an embedding
                                    NE( b
                                        X, Z) ⊂ Cone(βe1 , . . . , βel , λ).

    This induces embeddings

                                       k[[NE(X, Z)]] ,−→ k[[q1 , . . . , ql ]],
                                       k[[NE(Z, Z)]] ,−→ k[[q1′ , . . . , qm′
                                                                                ]],
                                       k[[NE( b
                                             X, Z)]] ,−→ k[[q̃1 , . . . , q̃l , q]].

    Then the inclusion of the Novikov ring of X
                                              b

                                       X, Z)]] ,−→ k[q1/s , q−1/s ][[NE(X, Z)]]
                                 k[[NE( b
                                               e d˜ 7−→ Qφ∗ d˜q−[D]·d˜
                                               Q

induces a map

(4.8)                           k[[q̃1 , . . . , q̃l , q]] −→ k[q1/s , q−1/s ][[q1 , . . . , ql ]]
                                                   q̃i 7−→ qi q−ci
                                                    q 7−→ q.

Similarly, the map from the Novikov ring of Z

                                 k[[NE(Z, Z)]] −→ k[q1/s , q−1/s ][[NE(X, Z)]]
                                              QdZ 7−→ Qı∗ d q−ρZ ·d/(r−1) .


                                                               46
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


induces a map

(4.9)                         k[[q1′ , . . . , ql′ ]] −→ k[q1/s , q−1/s ][[q̃1 , . . . , q̃l ]]
                                                                                ′
                                              qi′ 7−→ Fi (q̃1 , . . . , q̃l )qci ,

where Fi are monomials in q̃1 , . . . , q̃l with non-negative exponents, and c′i ∈ 1s Z. Now we can
apply Lemma 4.6 to the maps 4.8 and 4.9 to obtain domains of convergence after passing to
the non-archimedean field k. The union of such domains of convergence from different choices is
connected.
   It is shown in [44, Theorem 5.18] that there exists a formal invertible change of variables

                                  H • (X)
                                       b −→ H • (X) ⊕ H • (Z)⊕(r−1) ,
                                        τe 7−→ τ (e
                                                  τ ), {ςj (e
                                                            τ )}0≤j≤r−2
                                                                        


defined over k[q1/s , q−1/s ][[NE(X, Z)]] and an isomorphism
                                                                             r−2
                                                                             M
                        Ψ : QDM( b
                                X)la 7−→ τ ∗ QDM(X)la ⊕                              ςj∗ QDM(Z)la
                                                                             j=0


that commutes with the quantum connection. Here, for a smooth projective variety X, QDM(X)la
denotes the formal logarithmic A-model F-bundle of X (called the quantum D-module of X in [44]),
after a base change to k[u, q1/s , q−1/s ][[NE(X, Z)]]. Furthermore, the maps τ , ςj and Ψ above also
satisfy the assumption of Lemma 4.6 by homogeneity, so we obtain domains of convergence after
passing to the non-archimedean field k.
    Finally, we deduce Theorem 4.5 by locally taking the quotient by the canonical foliations on the
base of the over-maximal F-bundles. The canonicity of the isomorphism follows from [38, §5.4].

4.3     The Leray-Hirsch formula
Let X be a smooth projective variety over K, E → X a vector bundle of rank r, and P(E) → X
the associated projective bundle. Let X ′ be the disjoint union of r copies of X. We have A-model
maximal F-bundles (H, ∇)/BP(E) , and (H′ , ∇′ )/BX ′ for P(E) and X ′ respectively.
Theorem 4.10. There is a canonical isomorphism of the maximal F-bundles between (H, ∇) and
(H′ , ∇′ ), over an analytic domain U in BP(E) and an analytic domain U ′ in BX ′ . The union of the
different choices of U is connected and nonempty, as is the union of the different choices of U ′ .
Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 4.5, Lemma 4.6 reduces the non-archimedean statement to the
formal version, which is shown by Iritani-Koto in [45, Theorem 5.1].


5       G-atoms
Atoms are elementary F-bundle building blocks which arise from the interplay of Gromov-Witten
and motivic information. As it is usually the case, one can build the corresponding theory by
using some universal framework of motivic cohomology, such as the framework of Nori motives
[65, 40], or the framework of André motivated cycles [3, 4] (for varieties defined over subfields of C).


                                                            47
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


Alternatively, for a more concrete and constructive description, we can work with some realization
of the motives, given by a choice of a suitable Weil cohomology theory.
    We will use the conventional notion of a Weil cohomology theory, i.e. a cohomology theory on
smooth projective varieties which is functorial for pullbacks, which is equipped with a Tate twist,
with trace and cycle class maps, and which satisfies the Künneth formula and Poincaré duality. We
will not spell out the details here but the precise definition and axioms can be found in standard
sources, e.g [64, Definition 1.2.13] and [6, Chapter 45,tag 0FFG]. To avoid lengthy qualifications we
choose to work with André motives and only consider Weil cohomology theories that factor through
André motives. In practical terms this means that all Weil cohomology theories we work with, arise
as tensor functors from the Karoubi closed symmetric monoidal category C K of pure André motives
over K to the monoidal category of graded k-vector spaces or to the monoidal category of graded
k-linear G-representations of a reductive group G.
    To access the full power and flexibility of the atomic compositions that we will introduce, we
would like to be able to treat the A-model F-bundles associated with general Weil cohomology
theories in a unified manner. To that end, we will need to keep track of the slightly complex
interaction between the symmetries of the field of definition of our varieties and the symmetries of
the coefficient field of the particular Weil cohomology theory we are utilizing.


5.1    Mumford-Tate groups in the nc setting
 Let again K ⊂ C and let C K denote the category of pure André motives of smooth projective
varieties over K. Let k be a field of characteristic zero, and let G be a proreductive group over k.
We also fix a central element ϵG ∈ G of order 2.

Definition 5.1. A (G, ϵG )-symmetric Weil cohomology theory defined on smooth projective
K-varieties is a tensor functor H • (−) : C K → Repk (G) to Z-graded representations of G, which
commutes with duality and satisfies the Z/2 folding conditions

   • The cohomology group H 2 (P1K ) is a trivial rank one G-module.

   • For any smooth projective K-variety X and any i ∈ Z, the element ϵG acts on H i (X) by (−1)i .

Remark 5.2. (a) As discussed in section 3.5.2.2.1, a (G, ϵG )-symmetric Weil cohomology theory
can be described equivalently as a tensor functor H • (−) : C K /Tate → Repk (G) from the category
of Tate periodized André motives to the category of representations of G.
    (b) The notion of (G, ϵG )-symmetry of a Weil cohomology theory is designed so that it captures
a realization of pure motives over K in which the cohomological grading is folded to a Z/2-grading,
and the cohomologies are considered modulo Tate twists. In particular (G, ϵG )-symmetric Weil
cohomology theories are candidates for cohomology theories that could potentially be extended to
produce realizations of nc-motives. The following are the standard examples we will be working
with.

Example 5.3. Let K ⊂ C, and let k be a field with char k = 0. Let S := Z/2 = {0, 1} and ϵS := 1 ∈ S.
The category Repk (S) is the category of Z/2-graded vector spaces. Let H • : C K → Vectk be any Weil
cohomology theory with values in k-vector spaces. We can refine H • to a functor H • : C K → Repk (S)
by letting the generator ϵS ∈ S act by multiplication by (−1)i on H i . We will refer to the pair (S, ϵS )
as the symmetry of Z/2-graded Weil cohomology theories.


                                                   48
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Example 5.4. Let k = K ⊂ C, H := Gm , and ϵH = −1 ∈ H = Gm . The category Repk (H)
of finite dimensional k-linear representations of H is the category of Z-graded k-vector spaces,
with the action
            L of ϵH recording the parity of grading. For any smooth projective variety X/K, let
  i
HDol (X) = p+q=i H p,q , where H p,q := H q (X, ΩpX ) and X = X ×K C. Let H = Gm act on H p,q with
weight p − q. We will refer to the pair (H, ϵH ) as the symmetry of Hochschild graded Dolbeault
cohomology.
Example 5.5. Let K ⊂ C and k = Q. Let MT denote the universal classical Mumford-Tate
group [24, 62], i.e. the group associated with the neutral Tannakian category of polarizable pure
Q-Hodge structures with the forgetful fiber functor. MT is a proreductive algebraic group over Q,
whose algebraic quotients are precisely the Mumford-Tate groups of symmetries of polarizable pure
Q-Hodge structures. There is a canonical central embedding ι : Gm ,→ MT controlling the weights
of pure Hodge structures.     We also have a Lefschetz character MT → Gm associated to the action of
MT on HB     (P1C )an , Q . Let Hod = ker(MT → Gm be the kernel of the Lefschetz character and let
          2
                         

ϵHod := ι(−1) ∈ G. We will refer to the pair (Hod, ϵHod ). as the symmetry of polarizable pure
rational Z/2-weighted Hodge structures. The de Rham and Hodge theorems imply that the
Z/2-graded Betti cohomology gives a fiber functor HB    •
                                                          (−) : C K /Tate → RepQ (Hod), i.e. HB
                                                                                              •
                                                                                                (−) is
a (Hod, ϵHod )-symmetric weil cohomology theory.
Example 5.6. Let K ⊂ C and k = Q. Let C K be the semisimple neutral Tannakian category of
pure motivated motives (see [3, 4]) with fiber functor the forgetful functor to rational vector spaces.
Consider the associated group GK of tensor automorphisms of the fiber functor is the proreductive
group scheme over Q, whose finite dimensional representations Again we have homomorphisms
ι : Gm → GK and GK → Gm controlling the weights of the motives and the action on HB             2
                                                                                                  (P1K ).
We set Mot := ker(GK → Gm ), and ϵMot = ι(−1). Then (Mot, ϵMot ) is the symmetry pair of
André’s Z/2-graded pure motivated motives. Again the Z/2-graded Betti cohomology H • (−)
is (Mot, ϵMot )-symmetric.
Example 5.7. Suppose K ⊂ C and k = Q, then by definition we have embeddings of proreductive
Q-groups
                                  S ⊂ Hod ⊂ Mot
so that ϵS = ϵHod = ϵMot . Furthermore if we consider K = C and base-change these groups to
Spec C we get embeddings of the corresponding complex proreductive groups which can be further
augmented to a chain of embeddings
                                    SC ⊂ HC ⊂ HodC ⊂ MotC ,
again with matching central elements of order two.
    The basic idea for constructing our invariants is the observation that the motivic information
captured by a pair (G, ϵG ) naturally amalgamates the analytic F-bundle data arising from nc-Hodge
theory. Since the passage from formal to analytic data will in general break the action of symmetries
we will have to exercise some extra care while encoding the motivic information in the analytic
setting.

5.2     G-atoms of projective manifolds
In this section we again assume that K ⊂ C, k is of characteristic zero, G is a proreductive group
over k, ϵG ∈ G is a central element of order two, and H • : C K → Repk (G) is a (G, ϵG )-symmetric


                                                   49
           Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


Weil cohomology theory, as in Definition 5.1. Fix an algebraic closure k ⊃ k and consider the
algebraically closed non-archimedean field k = k((yQ )) ⊃ k.

5.2.1    Germs of analytic Lie groups
We introduce the notion of local Lie groups and germs of Lie groups in the non-archimedean setting,
similar to the classical notions in differential geometry. A k-analytic local Lie group consists of
data (U, ı, e, V, m), where U is a k-analytic space over k, ı : U → U is an analytic involution, e ∈ U
is a point fixed by ı, V ⊂ U × U is an open subset and m : V → U is an analytic map, so that
  (1) U × {e} ∪ {e} × U ⊂ V , and m(g, e) = m(e, g) = g for all g ∈ V .
  (2) Graph(ı) ⊂ V , and m(ıg, g) = m(g, ı(g)) = e.
  (3) If (g1 , g2 , g3 ) ∈ U ×3 are such that the pairs (g1 , g2 ), (g2 , g3 ), (g1 , m(g2 , g3 )), and (m(g1 , g2 ), g3 )
      are all in V , then m(g1 , m(g2 , g3 )) = m(m(g1 , g2 ), g3 ).
Local k-analytic Lie groups form a category, where a morphism between (U1 , ı1 , e1 , V1 , m1 ) and
(U2 , ı2 , e2 , V2 , m2 ) is given by an analytic map φ : U1 → U2 which sends e1 to e2 , intertwines ı1 with
ı2 , and is such that φ × φ maps V1 to V2 and intertwines m1 and m2 .
     A germ of a k-analytic Lie group consists of a k-analytic local Lie group (U, ı, e, V, m) and a
(not necessarily analytic) subgroup H ⊂ U . We will denote such a germ by (U, H) when the rest
of the data is understood from the context. A strict morphism between two germs (U1 , H1 ) and
(U2 , H2 ) is a morphism φ : U1 → U2 of k-analytic local Lie groups with φ(H1 ) ⊂ H2 .
     The category of germs LieGermsk of k-analytic Lie groups is the localization of the cate-
gory of germs of k-analytic Lie groups with strict morphisms along the class of morphisms
φ : (U1 , H1 ) → (U2 , H2 ), which induce an isomorphism of k-analytic local Lie groups between
U1 and an open neighborhood of H2 .

Example 5.8. Suppose G is a non-archimedean analytic Lie group over k. Let H ⊂ G be a subgroup.
Then (G, H) is an object in LieGermsk which is called the analytic germ of G along H.

    Analytic actions of analytic local Lie groups on non-archimedean analytic spaces are defined
in the obvious manner. Suppose U is a k-analytic local Lie group which acts analytically on
a non-archimedean analytic space B. Suppose H ⊂ U is a (not necessarily analytic) subgroup.
Suppose S is a closed analytic subvariety in B and suppose S ⊂ B H , i.e. S is contained in the fixed
point locus for the H-action on B. Then for any analytic open neighborhood S ⊂ N ⊂ B of S in B
we can find an analytic local group neighborhood H ⊂ U ′ ⊂ U of H in U , so that the action map
U × B → B restricts to an action map U ′ × N → N . In particular, the analytic Lie group germ of
U along H will act on the analytic germ of the space B along S.

5.2.2    Local G-atoms.
Let X be a non-empty, smooth projective variety over K and consider the maximal, non-archimedean
A-model F-bundle associated to X, K, k, and H • (−), that we described in Definition 3.52. This
F-bundle is constructed as an analytic object over k((y)) and we can base change it to an analytic
object over the algebraic closure k ⊃ k((y)). To avoid unnecessary proliferation of notation we will
still write (H, ∇)/BX for the resulting non-archimedean analytic F-bundle over k.
     Let Gan denote the Berkovich analytification over k with trivial valuation (see [12]). It contains
an analytic subgroup Gℶ , which is a compact closed analytic subdomain, consisting of valuations on


                                                           50
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


the function field of G with centers inside G (see [73, Definition 1.3]). Taking base extension from k
to k, we obtain an inclusion of k-analytic groups Gℶ    k ⊂ Gk . Let G denote the germ of Gk along
                                                               an                               an

Gk . By definition G contains G(k) as a subgroup, and in particular contains ϵG .
  ℶ

    Since by definition H • (X) ∈ Repk (G), we have Gan      k acting on (H (X) ⊗k k) . Since the
                                                                              •           an

components BX,q and BX,t of the base BX are defined by strict inequalities of norms, they are
                             ev

preserved by the germ G. Hence G acts on the non-archimedean A-model F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX .
    Since H • (X) is a finite dimensional representation of the reductive group G, it follows that under
the action of G on BX the fixed points of G(k), Gℶ    k and G are all the same, i.e.

                                          G(k)          Gℶ
(5.9)                                   BX       = BX k = BX
                                                           G
                                                             .

To simplify notation we will denote the fixed point locus (5.9) by BX
                                                                    G
                                                                      .
   Since ϵG acts as ±1 on the even/odd parts of H • (X), it follows that the fixed point locus BX
                                                                                                G
                                                                                                  is
a purely even connected closed non-archimedean smooth k-analytic subvariety in BX . We will use
the subvariety BX
                G
                   ⊂ BX to define the G-atoms for X. Consider
 eX → B G - the ramified covering given by the spectrum of κ|B G = Eu |B G ⋆ (−),
 B     X                                                            X         X

       G
 UX ⊂ BX  - the open locus where the number of eigenvalues of Eu |B G ⋆ (−) is maximal, i.e. the
                                                                   X

    locus over which the reduced cover B
                                       eX,red → B G is unramified.
                                                 X

 eX := B
 U     eX,red ×B UX - the restriction of the cover B
                                                   eX,red to UX .
                XG


Definition 5.10. The set of local G–atoms of X is the finite set π0 (U eX ) of connected components
of U
   eX . The multiplicity multα (X) of an element α ∈ π0 (U
                                                         eX ) is defined as the degree of the cover
UX,α → UX , where we write UX,α for the connected component of U
e                            e                                      eX labeled by α.

    The group Aut(X) acts on the set π0 (U
                                         eX ), preserving the multiplicity function. The quotient set
π0 (UX )/ Aut(X) depends only on the isomorphism class of X. Hence we can consider the disjoint
    e
union
                               AtomsK,loc
                                                G
                                     G      :=      π0 (U
                                                        eX )/ Aut(X)
                                                  [X]

where the union runs over all isomorphism classes of non-empty smooth projective varieties defined
over K. We will call AtomsK,loc
                            G    the set of local G–atoms of smooth projective K-varieties.
By definition this set depends only on the base field K.
   Next we will define some additional and natural elementary equivalences on local G-atoms.

5.2.3   Elementary equivalences from disjoint unions.
If X1 and X2 are two non-empty smooth projective varieties defined over K. Then we have

                                   π0 (U
                                       eX ⊔X ) = π0 (X1 ) ⊔ π0 (X2 ).
                                         1  2


                                                     eX )/ Aut(X1 ) ⊂ AtomsK,loc to be disjoint
In this situation we declare each local atom α ∈ π0 (U 1                   G
union elementary equivalent to its image α under the embedding
                                               ′


                         π0 ( U
                              eX )/ Aut(X1 ) ,→ π0 (U
                                1
                                                    eX ⊔X )/ Aut(X1 ⊔ X2 ).
                                                      1  2




                                                   51
           Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


5.2.4    Elementary equivalences from blowups.
If X is a pure-dimensional non-empty smooth projective K-variety containing a non-empty smooth
projective K-subvariety Z ⊂ X of codimension m ≥ 2, then we have the blowup X       b := BlZ X which is
also defined over K. Write X′ for the disjoint union X′ := X ⊔ Z ⊔ · · · ⊔ Z of X and (m − 1)-copies of
Z. Consider
              .
                     b - the maximal non-archimedean analytic A-model F-bundle of X;
     X
     b H, X
          b∇        BX                                                            b

   H , X∇ BX , ZH , Z∇ BZ - the maximal non-archimedean analytic A-model F-bundles for X
   X
                       

     and Z respectively;
  ′      ′
             .
  X
     H , X ∇ BX′ - the maximal non-archimedean analytic A-model F-bundles for X′ .


   Let b
       X
         κ : b
             X
               Ho → X  bH , Xκ : XH → XH , Zκ : ZH → ZH , and X′ κ : X′ H → X′ H
                         o            o      o            o         o                 o          o
denote the associated operators of quantum multiplication by the respective Euler vector fields.
    By definition we have
             ′      ′
                       .
(5.11)        X
                H , X ∇ BX′ =                      X
                                                       H , X∇                         Z
                                                                                      H , Z∇                        Z
                                                                                                                    H , Z∇
                                                                                                                         
                                                                     BX ⊞                           BZ ⊞ · · · ⊞               BZ ,
                                                                                  |                      {z                     }
                                                                                                      (m−1)−times


and similarly
                       ′        ′
                                                                                                              
(5.12)                 X
                            Ho , X κ       =       X
                                                   Ho , Xκ           ⊞        Z
                                                                              Ho , Zκ         ⊞ ··· ⊞        Z
                                                                                                             Ho , Zκ .
                                                                         |                      {z                  }
                                                                                          (m−1)−times


Furthermore, as explained in Section 4.2, Iritani’ s blow-up theorem [44, Theorem 5.14] and its
non-archimedean analytic variant Theorem 4.5 produce a nonempty connected open subsets U
                                                                                       b ⊂ B
                                                                                             X
and U ′ ⊂ BX′ and a canonical isomorphism
                                                                                             b

                                       .         ′     ′
                                                            .
(5.13)                           X
                                 bH , X
                                      b∇ U b ∼ = X H, X ∇ U ′

of the restricted F-bundles and hence a canonical isomorphism of bundles with κ-operators:
                        ′                                                              
                      ∼           X′
(5.14) X bH , b
             o
               X
                κ     =   X
                             Ho ,    κ      =    X
                                                  H o , X
                                                         κ  ⊞   Z
                                                                 Ho , Z
                                                                       κ   ⊞ · · · ⊞   Z
                                                                                        H o , Z
                                                                                               κ       .
                    U                    U′                                                          ′
                    b                                         |              {z                  } U
                                                                                                          (m−1)−times


     Next, let
                                      b := UX
                                     UX     b∩U                      and              UX′ := UX′ ∩ U ′
                                              b

be the maximal open subsets over which the reduced spectral covers of
                                                    ′       ′
                                                                  
                            X    X
                            bH , b
                              o    κ        and       X
                                                         Ho , X κ
                                       U
                                       b                            U′


                                                                         52
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


are unramified. By definition UXb is the complement in the connected analytic variety U of the
                                                                                          b
branch subvariety for the reduced spectral cover of X
                                                    bκ and hence is itself connected. By the same
token UX′ is also a connected open in UX′ . Indeed, by the tautological identification (5.12) of
                                              ×(m−1)
endomorphisms, we have that UX′ = UX × UZ             is a product of connected opens in BX and
various copies of BZ . Again UX′ is the complement in UX′ of the branch subvariety for the reduced
                   ′
spectral cover of X κ and so is connected.
    Following our notational convention, we denote these unramified covers by U  e → U and
                                                                                   X
                                                                                   b         X
                                                                                             b
e X′ → UX′ respectively. By construction we have
U
                          e = U
                          U   e ×U U                          and      e X′ = U
                                                                       U      eX′ ×U ′ UX′ .
                            X
                            b  Xb b X
                                  X
                                     b                                              X



Furthermore, the isomorphism (5.14) induces an isomorphism of covers
                                                               ∼
                                                       U
                                                       e       =     /U
                                                                      e X′
                                                         X
                                                         b

                                                              ∼       
                                                       Ub
                                                               =    / UX′ ,
                                                          X

and hence a bijection of sets of connected components
                                                        e )∼
                                                    π0 (U b = π0 (UX′ ).
                                                                  e
                                                          X

Since UX b ⊂ UXb and UX′ ⊂ UX′ are connected open subsets, we also have that the natural maps
π 0 (U
     e ) → π 0 (U
       X
       b
                 e ) and π0 (U
                   X
                   b
                               e X′ ) → π0 (U
                                            eX′ ) are surjective. Finally, note that the identification
                                                                       ×(m−1)
(5.12) gives an identification of unramified covers of UX′ = UX × UZ          :
                                                      m−1
                                                                                    !
                                    ×(m−1)
                                           G           G
                 UX′ = UX × U
                  e        e
                                     Z       UX ×         UZ × · · · × UZ × · · · UZ ,
                                                                       e
                                                                    a=1                 slot a

and thus we get a canonical bijection of sets of connected components

                               π0 (U
                                   eX′ ) = π0 (U
                                               eX ) ⊔ π0 (U
                                                          eZ ) ⊔ · · · ⊔ π0 (U
                                                                             eZ ) .
                                                      |          {z            }
                                                                          (m−1)−times

Altogether we get a correspondence of sets of local G-atoms:

(5.15)                                           e )∼
                                             π0 (U   = π0 ( U
                                                            e X′ )
                                                   X
                                                   b
                                        ww                                  **
                              π0 (U
                                  e )
                                    X
                                    b                                 π0 ( U
                                                                           eX ) ⊔ π0 (U
                                                                                      eZ )⊔(m−1)

                      xx                                                                            **
         π0 ( U
              e )/ Aut( b
               Xb        X)                                                                        π0 (U
                                                                                                       eX′ )/ Aut(X′ ).

We declare a local atom α ∈ π0 (X)/
                                 b Aut to be blowup elementary equivalent to a local atom
α ∈ π0 (X )/ Aut(X ) if α and α are related by the correspondence (5.15).
 ′       ′         ′            ′



                                                               53
            Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


5.2.5   Elementary equivalences from projective bundles.
Suppose X/K is a non-empty smooth projective variety and E is a vector bundle of rank r ≥ 2 on X.
By the results of Iritani and Koto [45], and Hinault, Yu, Zhang, and Zhang [38, Section 5] reviewed
in Section 4.3, we can identify a non-empty connected domain UP(E) in UP(E) with the product of r
copies of a domain UX ⊂ UX so that the corresponding F-bundles and operators κ are compatible.
Again, this gives a correspondence between the local G-atoms for P(E) and the local G-atoms for X⊔r .
We declare that a local atom α ∈ π0 (UeP(E)) )/ Aut(P(E)) is Leray-Hirsch elementary equivalent
to a local atom α ∈ UX⊔r / Aut(X ) if α and α′ are related by the correspondence.
                   ′   e           ⊔r



5.2.6   G-atoms of K-varieties.
With all this in place we can now define G-atoms of projective varieties.
Definition 5.16. The set of G-atoms of smooth projective K-varieties is the quotient AtomsK   G
                                  K,loc
of the set of local atoms AtomsG        by the equivalence relation generated by the elementary
equivalences defined in Sections 5.2.3–5.2.5.
   The set AtomsK
                G of G-atoms is naturally filtered by subsets
                                                                            [
             AtomsK              K
                  G,dim≤0 ⊂ AtomsG,dim≤1 ⊂ · · · ,          AtomsK
                                                                 G =              AtomsK
                                                                                       G,dim≤d ,
                                                                            d≥0

where an atom α belongs to AtomsKG,dim≤d if there exists a smooth projective K-variety of dimension
≤ d whose atomic composition contains α.
    Combined with the weak factorization theorem of Abramovich, Karu, Matsuki, and Włodarczyk
[81, 1] this makes G-atoms candidates for obstructions to birational equivalence. Concretely we
have the following simple
Proposition 5.17. (Non-rationality criterion) Let X be a smooth projective K-variety of
dimension d ≥ 2. Suppose we have a G-atom α ∈ AtomsK G which appears in the atomic composition
                        / AtomsK
of X and is such that α ∈                                                                d
                               G,dim≤d−2 . Then X can not be birationally equivalent to PK .

Proof. Suppose X is birational to PdK . By the weak factorization theorem [81, 1] a birational map
between PdK and X will be given by a backward/forward sequence of blowups and blow-downs with
smooth centers. Since the centers must have codimension at least two, and the atomic composition
of PdK consists of d + 1 copies of the G-atom of a point, the blowup equivalence relation implies
that the atomic composition of X must be comprised only of atoms in AtomsK    G,dim≤d−2 . This is a
contradiction.
                                                                            K
5.2.6.1 Chemical formulas of K-varieties. Write Z⊕ AtomsG for the free abelian group
                           ⊕ AtomsK
generated by AtomsK
                  G , and Z≥0
                                  G
                                    for the additive monoid of free linear combinations of atoms
                                                                                             K
with non-negative integer coefficients or. Equivalently, we can think of of Z⊕ AtomsG (respectively
 ⊕ AtomsK
Z≥0     G
         ) as the ring (respectively smiring) of finitely supported Z-valued (respectively Z≥0 -valued)
functions on AtomsK G.
   Splitting the product of varieties into its atoms gives rise to a well-defined map
                                                             ⊕ AtomsK
                                AtomsK        K
                                     G × AtomsG −→ Z≥0
                                                                    G
                                                                        .


                                                  54
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


                                           ⊕ AtomsK
This map endows the additive monoid Z≥0           G
                                                      with the structure of a commutative associative
                                                                       K
unital semiring, and similarly endows the free abelian group Z⊕ AtomsG with the structure of a unital
commutative ring.
   Note that the assignment which sends an isomorphism class of varieties [X] to its atomic
composition:

                                                                             / Z≥0 ,
                                  X
                   CFG (X) =          multX (α) · δα :      AtomsK
                                                                 G
                           α∈π0 (U
                                 eX )/ Aut(X)

is naturally a finite multiset. The multiset CFG (X) can be thought of as the chemical formula of
X, i.e. the list of the G-atoms in the atomic composition of X together with their multiplicities.

5.2.6.2 Additivity properties of CF. The elementary equivalences we built into the definition
of G-atoms imply that the chemical formula multiset satisfies a number of natural additvity
properties:
   (1)   For two smooth projective K-varieties X1 , X2 , we have

                               CFG (X1 ⊔ X2 ) = CFG (X1 ) + CFG (X2 ).

   (2) For a smooth projective K-variety X, a smooth closed subvariety Z ⊂ X of codimension r,
and the blowup X
               b of X along Z, we have
                                 
                            CFG X b = CFG (X) + (r − 1) · CFG (Z).


   (3) For a smooth projective K-variety X, a rank r vector bundle V on X, and the associated
projective bundle P(V ), we have

                                      CFG (P(V )) = r · CFG (X).


    Combined with Bittner’s relations [13], these properties imply that the multiset assignment
X 7→ CFG (X) induces a well defined ring homomorphism
                                                                   K
                                   cfG : K0 (VarK ) −→ Z⊕ AtomsG
                                                                         K
from the Grothendieck ring of varieties K0 (VarK ) to the ring Z⊕ AtomsG The homomorphism cfG can
be thought of as the function assigning to each K-class of varieties its chemical formula.

   Specific chemical formulas are pretty difficult to compute as they require a detailed knowledge of
quantum multiplication. Still we have the following general

Lemma 5.18. Let X be a connected smooth projective variety over an algebraically closed field
K = K with a numerically effective canonical class. Then the G-atomic composition of X consists
of a single atom η(X).


                                                  55
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


Proof. Let (Ti ) be a homogeneous basis of H • (X), let (ti ) be the associated formal coordinates,
and let (T i ) be the dual basis with respect to the Poincaré pairing. Recall that the big quantum
product is given by
                                                X ∂3Φ
                                      Ti ⋆ Tj =             T r,
                                                 r
                                                   ∂t ∂t ∂t
                                                     i j r

where
                       ∂3Φ        X qβ X                                 β
                                =               ⟨Ti Tj Tr Ti1 · · · Tin ⟩0,n+3 ti1 · · · tin .
                    ∂ti ∂tj ∂tr     n! i ,...,i
                                   n≥0,β      1     n


Since KX is nef, it follows from the virtual dimension calculation that if T r has nonzero coefficient
in Ti ⋆ Tj , then
                                      deg T r ≥ deg Ti + deg Tj .
Thus the Euler vector field action on H • (X) increases the degrees. We conclude that its spectrum
contains only one element, coming from H 0 (X).

5.2.6.3 Change of group. Let ι : G          e ⊂ G be a reductive subgroup of G defined over Q.
Assume also that the central order two element ϵG ∈ G is contained in G.   e Then the fiber functor
H : C → Repk (G) which is the composition of H : C → Repk (G) with the pullback by the
 e •    K           e                                   •     K

inclusion ι∗ : Repk (G) → Repk (G)
                                 e is a (G,
                                         e ϵG )-symmetric Weil cohomology theory.
     Suppose X is a smooth projective K-variety. By definition H • (X) and H e • (X) coincide as super
k-vector spaces and only differ as representations: H (X) is a representation of G and H
                                                      •                                   e • (X) is the
same vector space viewed as a representation of the subgroup G    e ⊂ G. Therefore, the constructions
of the two maximal A-model k-anayltic F-bundles associated with these symmetric Weil cohomology
theories are compatible. In concrete terms, the maximal A-model k-analytic F-bundle associated
with the (G,
           e ϵG )-symmetric Weil cohomology theory H      e • equals the maximal A-model k-analytic
F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX associated with the (G, ϵG )-symmetric Weil cohomology theory H • but instead
of considering (H, ∇)/BX as a G-equivariant F-bundle, one must consider it as a e       G-equivariant
F-bundle. Thus we have an inclusion BX ⊂ BX and the spectral cover of κ|B G is the restriction of
                                         G      G
                                                e
                                                                                X
the spectral cover of κ| Ge to the submanifold BX G
                                                    .
                         BX
    Tracing the way the components of the unramified part of the reduced spectral cover split under
this restriction gives us a natural map of local atoms

                                                                 ⊕ AtomsK,loc
                                  ι⋄,loc : AtomsK,loc −→ Z≥0            G
                                                                                ,
                                                G
                                                e
and also a natural map
                                                               ⊕ AtomsK
                                        ι⋄ : AtomsK
                                                  e −→ Z≥0
                                                  G
                                                                      G



of atoms.
    Thus we tautologically get a natural compatibility of the corresponding chemical formula multisets,
namely
                                       CFG (X) ◦ ι⋄ = CFG  e(X).



                                                        56
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


5.2.7   Reduction to G-invariants.
For computational utility it is very useful to note that the local atoms of a projective variety, are
captured completely by the eigenvalues for the action of the Euler vector field on the G-invariant
part of the fiber of the F-bundle. To explain this we will need some preliminary statements. Fix a
field k of characteristic zero. Suppose G is an algebraic reductive group over k, and ϵG ∈ G is a
central element of order 2.
    Suppose (A, ◦, 1A ) is a finite dimensional commutative unital superalgebra over some algebraic
closure k ⊃ k. Suppose the reductive group G acts linearly on A, preserving the unital algebra
structure, and so that ϵG acts as the parity operator. Because ϵG is central, we will have that
the G-fixed part AG of A is a totally even subalgebra in A. Let a ∈ AG be a G-invariant
element. Multiplication by a gives a linear operator on the finite dimensional vector space A which
automatically will preserve the subalgebras AG ⊂ Aev ⊂ A.
    Given a linear operator T : V → V on a finite dimensional k-vector space V we will write
redspec(T ) ⊂ k for the reduced spectrum of T , i.e. for the set of distinct eigenvalues of T .
    With this notation we now have the following
Lemma 5.19. If a ∈ AG , then multiplication by a has the same eigenvalues on all of A and on the
subalgebra of G-invariants AG . More precisely we have

              redspec(a ◦ (−)) = redspec ((a ◦ (−))|Aev ) = redspec ((a ◦ (−))|AG ) .

Proof. We have a natural algebra homomorphism eva : k[x] → AG ⊂ A, given by eva (f (x)) = f (a).
Since A is finite dimensional over k, the homomorphism eva has a non-trivial kernel ideal which will
be generated by a monic polynomial p(x), i.e. ker(eva ) = (p) ◁ k[x].
    Since k[x]/(p) ,→ Aev ⊂ A is an injective algebra homomorphism, it follows that the map
Spec(AQ  ev
             ) → Spec(k[x]/(p)) is dominant. If we decompose p into a product of linear factors
              s
p(x) = i=1 (x−λi )di with λi ̸= λj if i ̸= j, then k[x]/(p) = ⊕m i=1 k[x]/((x−λi ) ) and so Spec(A ))
                                                                                  di                   ev

dominates the closed zero dimensional subscheme M = ⊔i=1 Spec(k[x]/(x − λi ) ) ⊂ Ak . Thus
                                                               m                       di        1

Spec(A) is a disconnected affine superscheme which is a disjoint union Spec(A) = ⊔m        i=1 Si , where
Si is the preimage of the i-th connected component Spec(k[x]/((x − λi )di )) of M under the map
Spec(A) → Spec(Aev ) → M .
    Let Ai be the algebra of global functions on Si . Then A decomposes into a direct sum A = ⊕m    i=1 Ai
of unital commutative super algebras. Since a is G-invariant, this decomposition is a decomposition
of unital algebras which are G-representations, and so we must have G · 1Ai = 1Ai . Similarly,
the projection ai of a into Ai must be G-invariant. But by construction, the minimal polynomial
of (a ◦ (−))|Ai = ai ◦ (−) : Ai → Ai is equal to (x − λi )ei for some 0 < ei ≤ di , and so for every
i = 1, . . . , m we have
                                
            redspec (a ◦ (−))|AG   = redspec (a ◦ (−))|Aev    = redspec ((a ◦ (−))|Ai ) = {λi }.
                                                            
                               i                          i


This concludes the proof of the lemma.

   Suppose now X/K is a smooth projective variety, and suppose (H, ∇)/BX is the corresponding
A-model non-archimedean k-analytic F-bundle associated with X, k ⊂ k, and a (G, ϵG )-symmetric
Weil cohomology theory H • (−) on K-varieties.
   Recall that (H, ∇)/BX is a G(k)-equivariant maximal F-bundle, such that for Ho = H|BX ×{u=0}
the induced quantum product ⋆ : Ho⊗2 → Ho and the Euler vector field Eu ∈ H 0 (BX , TBX ) =


                                                   57
            Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


H 0 (BX , Ho ) are preserved by G(k). The group G(k) acts on the restriction Ho |B G by bundle
                                                                                      X
automorphisms and so the quantum multiplication by Eu |B G preserves the subbundle (Ho |B G )G(k) ⊂
                                                          X                               X
Ho |B G of G(k)-invariants, which is also equal to the bundle of G-invariants4 . Let eu denote the
      X
                                                                   G(k)
restriction of the operator Eu |B G ⋆ (−) to the subbundle Ho |B G        . Let SX → BX  G
                                                                                             be the
                                 X                                X
spectral cover parametrizing the eigenvalues of the operator
                                                           G(k)            G(k)
                                       eu :       Ho |B G           → Ho |B G       .
                                                       X                     X



By construction SX ⊂ B   eX is a closed analytic subspace in the spectral cover B eX parametrizing
the eigenvalues of Eu |B G ⋆ (−) acting on all of Ho |B G . However, since Ho is a bundle of unital
                         X                             X

commutative super-algebras and since Eu is even, Lemma 5.19 implies that the inclusion SX ⊂ B    eX
induces an identification SX,red = BX,red of the associated reduced k-analytic spaces. Therefore we
                                    e
can also describe UeX → UX as the unramified part of the reduced spectral cover SX,red → B G for
                                                                                              X
Eu ⋆(−) acting on the bundle of G(k)-invariants, or equivalently the bundle of G-invariants.


5.3     G-atomic F-bundles
The abstract definition of atoms in Section 5.2.6 is universal but hard to use in practice. In this
section, we introduce the notion of G-atomic F-bundle, which will serve as a simpler version of
G-atom for the purpose of this paper.

5.3.1     Definition of an atomic F-bundle
Next we will consider actions of germs of analytic Lie groups on F-bundles. Let k be a field of
characteristic zero, and let k be an algebraically closed non-archimedean field containing k, extending
the trivial valuation on k. Fix a pair (G, ϵG ) as in Section 5.1. More precisely, we replace G by any
finite dimensional quotient.
    Let G, Gℶ ⊂ Gan , Gℶ   k ⊂ Gk and G be as in Section 5.2.2. Let (H, ∇)/B be a G-equivariant
                                  an

k-analytic F-bundle where the G-action on D is trivial. Let b ∈ B be a rigid point fixed by G and
(B, b) the germ of B at b. Restricting (H, ∇)/B to (B, b), we obtain a G-equivariant k-analytic
F-bundle germ.

Definition 5.20. A (G, ϵG )-atomic F-bundle (or a G-atomic F-bundle for short) is a G-
equivariant k-analytic F-bundle germ (A, ∇)/(B, b) such that
    (1) (A, ∇)/(B, b) is maximal,
    (2) the action of ϵG on the super vector bundle A is the Z/2-grading action,
    (3) the Eu-action on A|(B G ,b),u=0 has a single eigenvalue.
   4 Note that since G(k) acts trivially on the base B G and by linear analytic automorphisms on H , it follows that
                                                       X                                            o
the linear action of G(k) along the fibers of Ho |B G extends to the analytic action of G corresponding to the linear
                                                       X
action of Gk on H • (X) ⊗k k. Again since H • (X) is a finite dimensional representation of the proreductive group G(k),
the fixed points of the G-action on (H • (X) ⊗k k)an will be equal to (H • (X)G(k) ⊗k k)an , i.e. to the fixed points of the
G(k)-action on (H • (X) ⊗k k)an .


                                                               58
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


   In the rest of this section we will discuss the G-atomic F-bundles coming from Gromov-Witten
theory. Ultimately the invariants we need will be universal A-model G-atomic F-bundles, i.e. A-model
G-atomic F-bundles associated with some Tannakian theory of motives or some particular realization
of motives. Such G-atomic F-bundles are dubbed G-atoms and we discuss the most useful examples
below.

5.3.2   Geometric G-atomic F-bundles
We use the notations from Section 5.2.2. By the spectral decomposition theorem (Theorem 4.1), for
every rigid point b ∈ UX , the restriction of the F-bundle (H, ∇) to the germ (UX , b) splits into a
collection of G-atomic F-bundles AX,b,b̃ indexed by the points b̃ of the fiber U
                                                                               eX,b .

Definition 5.21. A geometric G-atomic F-bundles of K-varieties is a G-atomic F-bundle AX,b,b̃
arising from the above construction. We consider the equivalence relation on geometric G-atomic
F-bundles generated by the following:
 (1) Two geometric G-atomic F-bundles are equivalent if the G-atomic F-bundles are isomorphic.
 (2) Two geometric G-atomic F-bundles AX,b1 ,b̃1 and AX,b2 ,b̃2 arising from the same variety X are
     equivalent if b̃1 and b̃2 belong to the same connected component of U eX .
                     K,F
We denote by AtomsG      the set of geometric G-atomic F-bundles modulo the above equivalence
relation. Given a smooth projective K-variety X, let CFFG (X) denote the multiset of geometric G-
atomic F-bundles associated to X. Formally, CFFG (X) is a multiplicity function CFFG (X) : CFK,F
                                                                                             G → Z≥0
with finite support.

Proposition 5.22. We have a map from the set AtomsK     G of G-atoms of varieties over K to the set
     K,F
AtomsG of geometric G-atomic F-bundles sending each connected component U      eX,α to a G-atomic
F-bundle AX,b,b̃ for some rigid point b ∈ UX and b̃ ∈ UX,b .
                                                      e

Proof. The equivalences (1) and (2) in Definition 5.21, imply that there is a well defined map from
local G-atoms to geometric G-atomic F-bundles. Indeed, suppose α ∈ π0 (U        eX ), let b ∈ UX be a
rigid point, and let x ∈ UX be a rigid point sitting over b. Then in the spectral decomposition
                          e
(see Theorem 4.1 ) of the F-bundle germ (H, ∇)/(BX , b) there is a factor (AX,b,x , ∇)/( xBX,xb )
corresponding to the generalized κ-eigenspace with eigenvalue x. This factor is by construction a
geometric G-atomic F-bundle whose equivalence class depends only on α but not the points b and x.
    This gives a map from the set AtomsK,loc
                                        G    of local G-atoms of varieties over K to the set AtomsK,F
                                                                                                  G .
It remains to check that this map factors through the equivalence relations defined in Sections 5.2.3–
5.2.5. Concretely, we need to check the additivity properties:
   (1) For two smooth projective K-varieties X1 , X2 , we have

                                 G (X1 ⊔ X2 ) = CFG (X1 ) + CFG (X2 ).
                               CFF                F           F



   (2) For a smooth projective K-variety X, a smooth closed subvariety Z ⊂ X of codimension r,
and the blowup X
               b of X along Z, we have
                                 
                            CFFG X = CFG (X) + (r − 1) · CFG (Z).
                                  b       F                  F




                                                 59
         Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


   (3) For a smooth projective K-variety X, a rank r vector bundle V on X, and the associated
projective bundle P(V ), we have

                                       G (P(V )) = r · CFG (X).
                                     CFF                 F



These hold almost tautologically. The A-model F-bundle associated to a disjoint union X1 ⊔ X2 is
isomorphic to the external direct sum of the respective A-model F-bundles. This implies (1). The
remaining statements (2) and (3) follow again from Theorems 4.5 and 4.10.
Proposition 5.23. For a G-atom of K-varieties represented by a G-atomic F-bundle (A, ∇) over a
germ (B, b), the isomorphism class of the Gk -representation A|b,u=0 is well-defined and independent
of the choice of the representative.
Proof. It suffices to check the independence for the equivalence in Definition 5.21(1). Using the
notations therein, if b̃1 and b̃2 belong to a same connected component U of U
                                                                            eX , we obtain a subbundle
A ⊂ H|UX ×{u=0} over UX given by generalized eigenspaces of the Eu-action with eigenvalues in
V . Since G is a proreductive group, its finite dimensional representations are rigid (see e.g. [61,
Proposition 15.15]).
    Therefore, every fiber of A gives the same isomorphism class of G-representations.

   Again, the set AtomsK
                       G of G-atoms is naturally filtered by subsets

           AtomsK,F            K,F
                                                              AtomsK,F                  AtomsK,F
                                                                                  [
                G,dim≤0 ⊂ AtomsG,dim≤1 ⊂ · · · ,                   G =                       G,dim≤d ,
                                                                                  d≥0


where an atom α belongs to AtomsK,F
                                G,dim≤d if there exists a smooth projective K-variety of dimension
≤ d whose atomic composition contains α.
   Splitting the product of varieties into its atoms gives rise to a well-defined map
                                                                 ⊕ AtomsK,F
                              AtomsK,F
                                   G   × AtomsK,F
                                              G   −→ Z≥0                G
                                                                              .

                                             ⊕ AtomsK,F
This map endows the additive monoid Z≥0             G
                                                          with the structure of a commutative associa-
                                                                                    K,F
tive unital semiring, and similarly endows the abelian group Z⊕ AtomsG                    with the structure of a
commutative ring.
    Note that Bittner’s relations [13] ensure that the assignment which sends an isomorphism class
of varieties to its chemical formula

                                       [X]              / CFFG (X) ,

gives rise to a well defined ring homomorphism
                                                                   K,F
                                   cfFG : K0 (VarK ) −→ Z⊕ AtomsG
                                                                              K,F
from the Grothendieck ring of varieties K0 (VarK ) to the ring Z⊕ AtomsG . Again the homomorphism
cfFG can be thought of as the function assigning to each K-class of varieties its atomic F-bundle
valued chemical formula, i.e. the list of its G-atomic F-bundles and their multiplicities.


                                                   60
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


5.4     Hodge atoms
In this section we discuss a particularly versatile example of (G, ϵG )-atoms which we call Hodge
atoms. These are the atoms corresponding to the symmetry pair from Example 5.5. In other words,
we take K = C, k = Q and we consider the Mumford-Tate pair (Hod, ϵHod ) controlling the polarizable
pure rational Z/2-graded Hodge structures. We will also fix the rational Betti cohomology HB •
                                                                                               (−, Q)
as our (Hod, ϵHod )-symmetric Weil cohomology theory. Let k = Q((y )) be the algebraically-closed
                                                                       Q

non-archimedean field of Puiseux series in an auxilliary variable y. For a smooth complex projective
variety X we take (H, ∇)/BX to be the maximal non-archimedean A-model F-bundle associated
with X, K = C, k = Q((yQ )) ⊃ k = Q, and H • (−, Q), that we described in Defintion 3.32. By
construction (H, ∇)/BX is (Hod(Q), ϵHod )-equivariant, and so by specializing Definition 5.21 to this
context we arrive at the notion of Hod-atoms which we will call Hodge atoms. Since Hodge atoms
are our main invariant let us explicate.
    Let BXHod
              ⊂ BX be the locus of Hod(Q)-fixed points in the non-archimedean super k-analytic va-
riety BX . Let B
               e → B Hod be the ramified covering given by the spectrum of the Eu-action, UX ⊂ B Hod
the locus where the number of eigenvalues of the Eu-action is maximal, and
eX := B
U        ered ×B UX . The set of local Hodge atoms associated to X is again π0 (U           eX ) and
the multiplicity of an α ∈ π0 (UX ) is defined to be the degree of the corresponding connected
                                 e
component U  eX,α of UeX as a covering of UX .
    The set HAtoms of all Hodge atoms of smooth complex projective varieties is the quotient
                                                                ,
                                            G
                             HAtoms :=  π0 (U     eX )/ Aut(X)      ∼,
                                           [X]


where the union is taken over isomorphism classes of complex smooth projective varieties, and the
equivalence relation ∼ is generated by the elementary equivalences corresponding to disjoint unions,
blowups with smooth centers, and projective bundles.
   For future reference let us record a few elementary but useful properties of Hodge atoms.

Lemma 5.24. Let X be a connected complex smooth projective variety with a numerically effective
canonical class. Then HAtoms(X) consists of a single atom η(X).

Proof. This is a special case of Lemma 5.18.

Lemma 5.25. Let X be a smooth complex projective variety. For any rigid point b ∈ UX , the
Hodk (k)-representation (Ho )b = H(b,0 ) is induced from a finite dimensional Q-linear representation
of Hod(Q) whose isomorphism class is independent of the choice of b.

Proof. This is a special case of Proposition 5.23. By definition

                               (Ho )b ∼  •
                                      = HB (X, k) = HB
                                                     •
                                                       (X, Q) ⊗Q k

is equipped with the action of Hodk (k) induced from the action of Hod(Q) on HB•
                                                                                 (X, Q) by extension
of scalars.
     Since Q ⊂ Q ⊂ Q((y Q )) = k, we can also view the k-linear action of Hodk (k) on HB  •
                                                                                            (X, k) =
HB (X, Q) ⊗Q k as being induced by extension of scalars from the natural action of HodQ (Q) on
   •

HB •
     (X, Q). But HodQ is a proreductive group over the algebraically closed field Q, and the vector


                                                 61
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


space HB •
           (X, Q) is finite dimensional, so the action ψb of HodQ (Q) on HB   •
                                                                                (X, Q) factors through
a completely reducible action of a finite dimensional reductive group over Q. The irreducible
representations of this finite dimensional group are classified by their highest weights and so can not
vary continuously with b. Therefore, the isomorphism class of the representation ψb is independent
of the choice of b.
    Using this we can define some basic numerical invariants of Hodge atoms. Let α ∈ HAtoms
be a Hodge atom. Then there is a smooth projective variety X so that the equivalence class α is
represented by a local atom α ∈ HAtomsloc (X), i.e. by a choice of a connected component Uα of
the unramified part U eX of the reduced spectral cover of the operator κ = Eu ⋆ (−) : Ho |B Hod →
                                                                                            X
Ho |BXHod
          for the k-analytic A-model maximal F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX .
    The subbundle E α ⊂ Ho |UX of generalized eigenspaces of Eu ⋆ (−) corresponding to the eigenval-
ues parametrized by U eX,α is a Hodk (k)-invariant. By Lemma 5.25, for any rigid point b ∈ UX the
representation of Hodk (k) on Ebα is induced by extension of scalars from some finite dimensional
Q-linear representation E α of HodQ whose isomorphism class is independent of b. As we have
indicated by the notation, the isomorphism class of the HodQ -module E α depends only on the atom
α and not on the particular local atom α representing the equivalence class α. Indeed, this follows
immediately from the fact that the elementary equivalences used defining Hodge atoms all respect
the action of Hod.
    Thus to every Hodge atom α we have assigned a finite dimensional Q-linear representation E α
of HodQ which is well defined up to isomorphism. With this notation we now have the following
Definition 5.26. For every Hodge atom α ∈ HAtoms we define
   (1) the dimension ρα of the space of Hodge classes in α as dimQ (E α )HodQ , and
    (2) the Hodge polynomial Pα (t) of α as the polynomial Pα (t) ∈ Z[t, t−1 ] whose coefficient
                                                                                             ×
at tk is equal to dimQ (E α )k , where (E α )k is the subspace in E α on which the subgroup Q ∼=
HQ (Q) ⊂ HodQ (Q) acts with weight k.

Remark 5.27. Suppose the Q-linear representation E α of HodQ (Q) is obtained by extension of
scalars from a Q-linear representation of Hod. But a Q-linear representation of Hod is a pure
Z/2-weighted Q-Hodge structure, i.e. an ordinary pure Q-Hodge structures whose bigrading has
been folded to the single Hochschild grading. Therefore if E α = V ⊗Q Q for some pure Q-Hodge
structure, then (E α )k = ⊕p,q :Pp−q=k V p,q . In other words, Pα (t) is obtained from the usual two
variable Hodge polynomial of p,q dimQ V p,q up v q of V after the substitution u = t, v = t−1 . The
symmetry of Hodge numbers of V then implies that in this case the Hodge polynomial Pα (t) will be
reciprocal (= invariant under t 7→ t−1 ).
    Of course, for a general HodQ (Q)-representation the associated Hodge polynomial will not have
any symmetry, so for a general Hodge atom the Hodge polynomial Pα (t) will not be reciprocal.
Proposition 5.28. For each Hodge atom α the dimension ρα of the space of Hodge classes in α
satisfies ρα ≥ 1.
Proof. This follows immediately from the fact that fiber of the Hodge atom at a rigid point of UX is
of the form Aα ⊗Q k where Aα is a non-zero unital commutative associative superalgebra over Q
which is endowed with a HodQ (Q)-action. In particular there is a non-zero even HodQ (Q)-invariant
vector, namely the unit 1Aα for the multiplication in Aα .


                                                  62
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Remark 5.29. Let α ∈ HAtoms be a Hodge atom and let α ∈ π0 (U     eX ) be a local atom representative
of α. Let x ∈ UX,α be a rigid point, let bx ∈ UX be its image, and let ( xH , x∇ )) the associated
              e
Hod-atomic F-bundle over the germ ( xB , bx ). Then dim ( xB )Hod(Q) = ρα and the fiber xH (bx ,0) is
isomorphic to E α ⊗Q k for a finite dimensional Q-linear representation E α of HodQ (Q) which has
Hodge polynomial Pα (t) and has a space (E α )Hod(Q) of Hodge classes of dimension dim (E α )Hod(Q) =
ρα .

   Finally, note that as in the case of the general G-atoms, the set of Hodge atoms is filtered by the
minimal dimension of a smooth projective variety in whose atomic composition a given atom can
appear. Again, this filtration together with the weak factorization theorem [81, 1] imply that Hodge
atoms can obstruct birational equivalence. Concretely we have the following
Proposition 5.30. (Non-rationality criterion) Let X be a smooth complex projective variety
of dimension d ≥ 2. Suppose we have a Hodge atom α which appears in the atomic decomposition
of X and is such that α ∈
                        / HAtomsdim≤d−2 . Then X can not be a rational variety.
Proof. This is a special case of Proposition 5.17.

5.5     Atoms from motivated motives
Suppose that we are in the setting of Example 5.6, i.e. K ⊂ C, k = Q, and H • (−) is Betti cohomology.
Take k := Q((yQ )). As discussed in section 3.5.2.2 the corresponding motivic Galois group MotK of
the category C K /Tate of André’s pure Z/2-graded motivated motives is a proreductive algebraic
group over Q.
    Let X be a smooth projective variety over K.               View the Betti cohomology as a
(MotK , ϵMotK )-symmetric fiber functor H • (−) : C K → RepQ (MotK ). Then we have a MotK -
equivariant maximal non-archimedean k-analytic A-model F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX corresponding to
X, K, k, and H • (X), obtained by base changing the maximal k((y))-analytic F-bundle introduced
in Definition 3.52 from k((y)) to k. The atomic F-bundles arising from such a (H, ∇)/BX are by
                                                                    MotK
definition MotK -equivariant F-bundles defined over the locus BX         corresponding to algebraic
cycles on X that are defined over K. The corresponding multiset of atoms AtomsMotK (X) is the
most sensitive obstruction to K-rationality our atom formalism provides. Note also that if X is such
that the eigenvalues of Eu ⋆(−) happen to be already defined over Q((y)), then by section 3.5.2.2.4,
the base of the corresponding atomic F-bundle contains a non-split torus which is twisted by a
homomorphism Gal(K/K) → Gal(Q/Q) from the Galois group of the field of definition, to the
Galois group of the coefficient field of our cohomology theory.
     More invariantly, without making a choice of a fiber functor, we can define the intrinsic
motivated atoms of smooth projective varieties over K. The category of nc-André motives
C K /Tate is a Z/2-graded Q-linear semisimple tensor category. Let 1 ∈ ob (C K /Tate) be the zero
dimensional Tate motive. As before, for a smooth projective variety X we denote the André motive of
X by h(X). Then the Z/2-graded rational vector space M (X) := HomC K /Tate (1, h(X)) is intrinsically
associated with X, and the standard construction of Gromov-Witten classes gives again a quantum
product
                   ⋆ : M (X) ⊗ M (X) −→ M (X) ⊗   b Q[[NE(X, Z)]] ⊗  d M (X)∨ .
                                                                   b Sym
Since NE(X, Z) parametrizes numerically effective classes of curves in X that are defined over K and
M (X) parametrizes motivated cycles in X defined over K, it follows that the actions of Gal(K/K)


                                                 63
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


on NE(X, Z) and M (X) are both trivial. The construction from section 3.5.2.2 now produces
an overmaximal k-analytic A-model F-bundle (M , ∇)/bX and a maximal k-analytic A-model F-
bundle (M, ∇)/bX . Here bX is a product of an k-analytic affine line (for the motivated cycles of
cohomological degree zero), a polydisc (for the motivated cycles of cohomological degree > 0), and a
tube domain in the analytic torus (NS(X, Z)tf ⊗ Gm,k )an . Similarly bX is a product an k-analytic
affine line (for the motivated cycles of cohomological degree zero), a polydisc (for the motivated
cycles of cohomological degree > 2), and a tube domain in the analytic torus (NS(X, Z)tf ⊗ Gm,k )an .
    Note that if we use the Betti cohomology fiber functor, then these F-bundles are realized by
the MotK -invariant part of the F-bundles we described in section 3.5.2.2, i.e. passinng to Betti
                                                   K            K
cohomology identifies (M , ∇)/bX with (H Mot , ∇)/BXMot and similalrly identifies (M, ∇)/bX
      K
               MotK
(HMot , ∇)/BX       . In particular, by section 5.2.7 the unramified part UeX of the reduced spectral
                                                      MotK
cover for the operator κ associated with (H, ∇)/BX         is isomorphic to the unramified part ũX of
                                                                      K
                                                                               MotK ∼
the reduced spectral cover of the operator κ associated with (HMot , ∇)/BX          = (M, ∇)/bX .
    Using (M, ∇)/bX as a basic invariant of X we can define the set of intrinsic motivated local atoms
of X as the set π0 (ũX ) of connected components of ũX and the set of intrinsic atoms of K-varieties
as the quotient                                                  ,
                                               G
                               AtomsKintr :=
                                              π0 (ũX )/ Aut(X)      ∼,
                                             [X]

where the union is taken over isomorphism classes of complex smooth projective varieties, and the
equivalence relation ∼ is generated by the elementary equivalences corresponding to disjoint unions,
blowups with smooth centers, and projective bundles.
   As explained in the previous paragraph, the choice of Betti cohomology as a fiber functor on C K ,
gives a bijection between the set of intrinsic motivated atoms AtomsK                        K
                                                                      intr and the set AtomsMotK of
MotK -atoms. The intrinsic viewpoint however, has the advantage that the set of atoms AtomsK    intr
does not depend on any choices and by construction is equipped with an action of the Galois group
Gal(k/Q) which is an extension of Gal(Q/Q) by the group Z   b of profinite integers.


6     New obstructions to rationality
In this section we will use Hodge atoms and more general G-atoms to prove new non-rationality
results. We will use the setup of Sections 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4. Specifically, we consider the pair
(Hod, ϵHod ) defined in Example 5.5, where Hod is the Galois group of the Tannakian category of
Z/2-weighted, polarizable, pure Q-Hodge structures, and ϵHod ∈ Hod is the Z/2-grading element.
The atoms for this symmetry group are the Hodge atoms and we will use them as obstructions to
rationality.
    Before we can discuss the atomic composition of specific smooth projective varieties, we need
to revisit Givental’s calculation of the quantum cohomology and quantum differential equation of
complete intersections and recast it in the F-bundle language.


6.1    F -bundles and Givental’s theorem
Let X be a smooth complex complete intersection of k ≥ 1 hypersurfaces of degrees d1 , . . . , dk in
PN −1 . We will assume that di > 1 for all i = 1, . . . , k, and that dtot = d1 + · · · + dk ≤ N , i.e.


                                                   64
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


that X is either a Fano or a Calabi-Yau. Under these assumptions we have 1 ≤ k < dtot ≤ N ,
dim X = N − 1 − k ≥ 1, and −KX = OX (N − dtot ).
   The image R ⊂ H • (X, Q) of the rational cohomology of PN −1 in the rational cohomology
                                                                                 −k−1
of X is the (N − k)-dimensional subalgebra spanned over Q by the classes {P i }N
                                                                               i=0    , where
P = c1 (O(1)) ∈ H (X, Q) is the hyperplane class.
                  2

   Let (H, ∇)/BX be the maximal non-archimedean, analytic A-model F-bundle associated with X.
Consider the subgroup ZP ⊂ NS(X, Z)tf . It gives rise to a subtorus

                      bX := (ZP ⊗ Gm,k )an ⊂ (NS(X, Z)tf ⊗ Gm,k )an = BX,q .

The torus bX is one dimensional with natural coordinate q which is dual to P .
    The restriction of (H, ∇)|bX ×D is an analytic F-bundle. The comparison [28] of the Gromov-
Witten invariants of X and the equivariant Gromov-Witten invariants of PN −1 implies that the
restricted connection ∇|bX ×D preserves the subbundle

                       h := R ⊗ ObX ×D ⊂ H • (X, Q) ⊗ ObX ×D = H|bX ×D .

This gives a new smaller analytic F-bundle (h, ∇)/bX of rank N − k = dim X + 1 over the one
dimensional base bX . If we write q for the coordinate on the analytic affine line (k · P )an that is
dual to basis vector P , then the meromorphic connection ∇ on h becomes

                                     ∇∂u = ∂u − u−2 K + u−1 G,
(6.1)
                                     ∇∂q = ∂q + u−1 q −1 A,

where G is the grading operator on h, A is the operator of quantum multiplication by P , and
K = (N − dtot )A is the operator of quantum multiplication by c1 (TX ). These operators are
coefficients of the restricted quantum ∇|bX×D acting on the subbundle h and so we have that K
is equal to the action of κ|bX on the subbundle h|u=0 , G is the restriction of Gr to the subbundle
h|u=0 , and A is the restriction quantum multiplication by P to the subbundle h|u=0 ⊂ H|bX ×{0} .
    In [28, Section 9] Givental described the sheaf of horizontal sections of (h, ∇)/bX in terms of the
fundamental solution of an explicit auxiliary linear ODE of order N − k, which was later dubbed the
quantum differential equation. Givental used his description to give a recursive procedure for
computing the Gromov-Witten invariants of X. For us however, the main takeaway from Givental’s
theorem is that along the one dimensional base bX the action of the operator (Eu ◦(−))|bX : h → h
can be computed from the quantum differential equation.
    To unpack this, let us recall Givental’s calculation from [28, Section 9]. Consider the following
setup:
   (1) Let d be a non-negative integer and let M0,2 (PN −1 , d) denote the moduli stack of genus
zero degree d stable maps φ : (C, p1 , p2 ) → PN −1 with two marked points.
    (2) Let ed be the the top Chern class of the vector bundle on M0,2 (PN −1 , d) whose fiber at
(C, p1 , p2 , φ) is H 0 (C, φ∗ (O(d1 ) ⊕ · · · O(dk )).
   (3) Let c ∈ H 2 (M0,2 (PN −1 , d), Q) denote the first Chern class of the universal tangent line at
the first marked point.
   (4) Write ev1 : M(PN −1 , d) → PN −1 for the evaluation at the first marked point.


                                                  65
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


In [28, Section 9] Givental argued that the equivariant version of [28, Corollary 6.4] implies that the
series
                                   ∞
                                                             1
                                   X                              
                 S(t, ℏ) := eP t/ℏ   (X ,→ PN −1 )∗ ev1∗        ed ∈ R((ℏ))[[et ]][t],
                                                           ℏ+c
                                       d=0

is a horizontal section of the formal quantum connection for X. Givental’s variables (t, ℏ) are related
to our variables (q, u) by the change of variables q = et , u = −ℏ. Therefore, we have that S as a
function of (u, q) belongs to R((ℏ))[[q]][log q], and viewed as a formal section of h is annihilated by
the connection ∇ given by (6.1).
   Furthermore, in [28, Theorem 9.1 and Corollary 9.2] Givental proved:
   (i) S(t, ℏ) is given by the explicit formula
                                         Qk Qddi                    
                                 X∞
                                           i=1   mi =1 (di P + m i ℏ)
                S(t, ℏ) = etP /ℏ     edt      Qd                       ∈ R((ℏ)) [[et ]] [t],
                                               m=1 (P + mℏ)
                                                               N
                                 d=0


   (ii) S(t, ℏ) satisfies the so called quantum differential equation
                                                       k
                                                       Y         di −1
                                      N −k                        Y                     
(6.2)                          ℏ∂t            S = et         di           ℏ di ∂t + mi        S,
                                                       i=1        mi =1

                                                                     Pdim X
and the components Si (t, ℏ) ∈ Q((ℏ))[[et ]][t] of S =                    i=0      Si · P i form a basis of the space of
solutions of the linear ODE (6.2).
Remark 6.3. (a) Givental’s description implies that in fact S(t, ℏ) belongs to the subring
R[ℏ, ℏ−1 ][[et ]][t] and so its specialization S(t, 1) as ℏ ⇝ 1 makes sense. Thus we have the specialized
series                                          Qk Qddi                    
                                       X∞
                                                 i=1     mi =1 (di P + mi )
                        S(t, 1) = eP t      edt      Qd                       ∈ R[[et ]] [t]
                                       d=0             m=1 (P   +  m)N


or, in terms of the variables (q, u), the u ⇝ −1 specialized series
                                            Qk Qddi                   
                                     X∞
                                             i=1   m i =1 (di P + mi )
                S(q, −1) = eP log(q)     qd     Qd                       ∈ R[[q]] [log q].
                                                  m=1 (P + m)
                                                                N
                                     d=0

(b) Rewriting the equation (6.2) in terms of the variables (q, u) we get that S as a series in
R[u, u−1 ][[q]][log q] satisfies
                                                             k            i −1
                                                                          dY
                              N −k                          Y                                     
(6.4)                 u q∂q           S = (−1)N −dtot q              di           u di q∂q + mi         S.
                                                             i=1          mi =1

Note that the component S0 (q, u) solving (6.4) is particularly simple. It is given by the hypergeometric
series
                                       Qk Qddi                      
                                X∞
                                         i=1           (d
                                                  mi =1 i P  + m  i )
                 S0 = eP log(q)     qd      Qd                         ∈ R[[q]] [log(q)].
                                               m=1 (P + m)
                                                             N
                                d=0


                                                             66
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


   Consider now the operator A : R((ℏ))[[et ]][t] → R((ℏ))[[et ]][t] of quantum multiplication by P . Its
matrix in the standard basis 1, P , . . . , P dim X has a diagonal-jump-shape with the step of the
jump equal to the index (N − dtot ) of the Fano variety X (in the example dim X = 8, N − dtot = 3)

                          0        0   ∗ et    0      0     ∗ e2t       0         0      ∗ e3t
                                                                                              
                         1        0    0     ∗ et    0       0       ∗ e2t       0        0 
                         0        1    0      0              0         0                  0 
                                                                                              
                                                     ∗ et                       ∗ e2t
                         0        0    1      0      0                 0         0
                                                                                              
                                                            ∗ et                         ∗ e2t 
                         0
                     A =          0    0      1      0       0                   0        0 
                                                                                              
                                                                      ∗ et                     .
                         0        0    0      0      1       0         0       ∗ et       0 
                         0        0    0      0      0       1         0         0
                                                                                              
                                                                                         ∗ et 
                         0        0    0      0      0       0         1         0        0 
                                                                                              

                          0        0    0      0      0       0         0         1        0

Here the unknown coefficients ∗ are integers, and A is symmetric with respect to a flip along the an-
tidiagonal. Equivalently, in the variables (q, u), the matrix of A : R((u))[[q]][log q] → R((u))[[q]][log q]
is given by the same matrix but with the exponentials et , e2t , e3t , . . . replaced by q, q 2 , q 3 , . . . ,
respectively.

   Consider now the second horizontality condition ∇∂q Ψ = 0 for the connection ∇. Explicitly it
reads uq∂q Ψ = −AΨ, or

                                                                                                             
                 ψ0                                                                                        ψ0
                             0                 0             0             0      ∗q 2     0
                                                                                                     
               ψ1                    ···           ∗q             ···                          ···     ψ1 
                          1          0     ···     0     ∗q       0    ···      0      ∗q 2   · · ·        
                            0          1      0             0             0               0
                                                                                                           
               .. 
                                                   ···            ∗q            ···            · · ·
                                                                                                        .. 
                                                                                                               
               .          0          0      1      0              0             0                     . 
                           
                                                            ···           ∗q              ···    · · ·
(6.5)                  = − 0          0      0      1      0             0               0
                                                                                                           
        u q∂q                                                      ···           ∗q             · · ·
                                                                                                      ·
                                                                                                               ,
               .          0          0      0      0      1       0             0                     . 
                                                                                                             
               ..                                                       ···             ∗q     · · ·
                                                                                                        .. 
                            0          0      0      0      0       1     0               0
                           
                                                                                ···            · · ·        
                            0          0      0      0      0       0     1       0
                                                                                                           
              
              
                      
                                                                                         ···    · · · 
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                
                            ···        ···    ···    ···    ···     ···   ···     ···     ···    ···
               ψdim X                                                                                    ψdim X

where the coordinates ψi of the vector function Ψ are functions of the variable of differentiation q,
depending on the parameter u.
   The connection between (6.5) and Givental’s quantum differential equation (6.4) arises as follows.
The last coordinate function ψdim X obeys the quantum differential equation, i.e. is a C-linear
combination of the functions S0 , S1 , . . . , Sdim X−1 . Now, starting with a vector valued solution
Ψ = (ψ0 , . . . , ψdim X )T of (6.5), we can use the diagonal-jump-shape of A to solve recursively for the
coordinate functions ψdim X−1 , ψdim X−2 , . . . , ψ1 , ψ0 in terms of the last coordinate function ψdim X .
Thus the system (6.5) becomes equivalent to ψdim X obeying an ODE of order N − k which has to be
Givental’s quantum differential equation. Comparing the coefficients of the ODE of order N − k that
we obtain from the recursive procedure with the coefficients of (6.4) we obtain a system of algebraic
equations on the unknown entries ∗ in the matrix A. This gives an algorithm for computing A and
K = (N − k)A from the quantum differential equation.



                                                       67
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


Example 6.6. (i) To illustrate the process, let us compute A in the case when X is a 3-dimensional
quadric, i.e. N = 5, k = 1, d = 2. In this case the system (6.5) reads

                                                     0 0                                   0
                                                                                              
                                          ψ0                                 a1 q                 ψ0
                                         ψ1      1 0                       0           a2 q  ψ1 
                                         ψ2  = − 0 1
                                    uq∂q                                                      · 
                                                                              0            0  ψ2 
                                                  

                                          ψ3         0 0                      1            0      ψ3

where a1 , a2 are some unknown integers. If we simplify notation by setting ϕ = ψ3 we get

                                                         ψ2 = −uq∂q ϕ,
                                                         ψ1 = −uq∂q ψ2 ,
                                                         ψ0 = −uq∂q ψ1 − a2 qϕ,
                                                  uq∂q ψ0 = −a1 qψ2 .

Solving recursively for all ψi in terms of ϕ we arrive at the 4-th order linear ODE

                                             (uq∂q )4 ϕ = −qu((a1 + a2 )q∂q + a2 )ϕ.

Comparing this with the quantum differential equation

                                                 (uq∂q )4 ϕ = −qu(2(2q∂q + 1))ϕ,

we get that a1 + a2 = 4, a2 = 2. Hence for this case we get

                                             0 0 2q 0
                                                          
                                           1 0 0 2q 
                                    A =   0 1 0 0  .
                                                           

                                             0 0 1 0


    Following this strategy, we can compute all coefficients in the connection (6.1) of the F-bundle
(h, ∇)/bX for any complete intersection. In particular we have the following
(ii) Suppose X is a smooth 3-dimensional cubic, i.e. N = 5, k = 1, d = 3. Then the coefficients of
the connection (6.1) defining the F-bundle (h, ∇)/bX are

               0       6q     0     0                     0   6q        0    0                      −3/2            0     0
                                         !                                        !                                            !
               1       0     15q    0                     1   0        15q   0                       0     −1/2     0     0
       A =                                   ,   K = 2                                ,    G =                                     .
               0       1      0     6q                    0   1         0    6q                      0      0      1/2    0
               0       0      1     0                     0   0         1    0                       0      0       0    3/2



(iii) Suppose X is a smooth 4-dimensional cubic, i.e. N = 6, k = 1, d = 3. The coefficients of the
connection (6.1) defining the F-bundle (h, ∇)/bX are
                                                                                                                          
          0        0    6q     0     0                   0         0    6q     0          0             −2    0      0   0     0
         1        0    0     15q    0                 1         0    0     15q         0            0    −1     0   0     0
     A = 0        1    0      0     6q  ,       K = 3 0         1    0      0          6q  ,   G =  0    0      0   0     0 .
          0        0    1      0     0                   0         0    1      0          0              0    0      0   1     0
          0        0    0      1     0                   0         0    0      1          0              0    0      0   0     2



                                                                       68
      Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


Remark 6.7. In this section we used Givental’s theorem to compute the action of the Euler vector
field for the A-model F-bundle of a projectoive manifold, which can in turn be used to analyze the
atomic decomposition of Fano complete intersections. It is important to note that even though
Givental’s original results for toric complete intersections do not work directly for other types of
Fano varieties, the current state of the art comprises many other methods that can be used to
compute the quantum spectrum virtually in any specific example. Three of these techniques deserve
special attention. The first is the quantum Lefschetz/Serre package, which includes the quantum
Lefschetz theorems of Lee, Kim, and Coates-Givental [58, 50, 18], and the quantum Serre theorems
of Coates-Givental and Iritani-Mann-Mignon [18, 46]. The second is the toric degeneration technique
which, as demonstrated in the work of Ciocan-Fontanine, Kim, and Sabbah [17], can be used to
derive the exact form of the quantum differential equation for complete intersections in homogeneous
spaces. Last but not least, one can use Homological Mirror Symmetry and the explicit forms of
mirrors as provided by the Hori-Vafa construction [39] to compute the quantum spectrum as the
critical values of the mirror Landau-Ginzburg potential.

6.2     Four-dimensional cubics
In this section we will apply the theory to some classical rationality problems.
Theorem 6.8. A very general 4-dimensional cubic hypersurface in CP5 is not rational.
Proof. Let X be a smooth cubic hypersurface in CP5 . Assume that X is Noether-Lefschetz general
in the sense that the only rational Hodge classes on X are the powers of the hyperplane class
P = c1 (OP5 (1))|X . Such cubic fourfolds exist e.g. by Voisin’s proof [75] of the Torelli theorem for
cubic fourfolds.
   The odd degree cohomology of X is zero and the total dimension of the even cohomology is
27. Following the construction explained in Section 3.5.2 we choose a homogeneous basis {Ti }27    i=1
of HB•
       (X, Q), so that T1 = 1 ∈ H 0 (X, Q), T2 = P , and deg Ti > 2 for i > 2. We write q for the
coordinate on NS(X, Q) = Q · P to P and we write ti for the coordinates dual to Ti for i ̸= 2.
Let (H, ∇)/BX be the maximal analytic A-model F-bundle for X defined in Section 3.5.2 with
connection ∇ given by
                                                              Deg − 4 · id
                           ∇∂u = ∂u − u−2 (Eu ⋆ (−)) + u−1                 ,
                                                                  2
(6.9)                       ∇∂q = ∂q + u−1 q −1 (P ⋆ (−)) ,
                           ∇∂ti = ∂ti + u−1 (Ti ⋆ (−)) , for i ̸= 2.

   Let b ∈ BX be the rigid point with coordinates q = 1, and ti = 0, for all i ̸= 2. Then
b ∈ bX ⊂ BX   Hod
                   ⊂ BX and by Lemma 5.19 we have that the reduced spectrum of the operator
(Eu ⋆ (−))b : H(b,0) → H(b,0) is the same as the reduced spectrum of the action of (Eu ⋆ (−))b on
the subspace of Hodge classes H(b,0)
                                Hod
                                     . By our genericity assumption

                                   Hod
                                  H(b,0) = ⊕4a=0 k · P a = h(b,0) .

Thus
                                    (Eu ⋆ (−))b |h(b,0) = K|q=1 ,
where K is the operator introduced in the previous section.


                                                 69
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


   As we saw in Section 6.1, the operator K : h|bX ×{0} → h|bX ×{0} can be computed from
Givental’s theorem and from Example 6.6 (iii) we have

                   0 0 6q     0   0                              0 0 6 0 0
                                                                           
                 1 0 0 15q 0                                  1 0 0 15 0
         K = 3 0 1 0         0 6q         and so              0 1 0 0 6
                                                      K|q=1 = 3 
                                                                           
                                                                            
                 0 0 1       0   0                            0 0 1 0 0
                   0 0 0      1   0                              0 0 0 1 0

The characteristic polynomial of this matrix is λ5 − 36 λ2 and so K|q=1 has eigenvalues 0 (appearing
with multiplicity 2), and 9, 9ζ, 9ζ 2 where ζ is a primitive third root of unity. Therefore the reduced
spectrum of κb := Eub ◦(−) acting on all of H(b,0) is also equal to {0, 9, 9ζ, 9ζ 2 }.
    By the spectral decomposition theorem Theorem 4.1 we then have that over some admissible
open neighborhood b ∈ U ⊂ BX    Hod
                                     the A-model F-bundle (H, ∇)/BX    Hod
                                                                           decomposes into an external
direct sum of maximal F-bundles:

                              (H, ∇) /U =               ⊞    Hλ , ∇λ /U λ
                                                                     

                                                 λ ∈ {0,9,9ζ,9ζ 2 }

compatible with the decomposition of H(b,0) into a direct sum of generalized eigenspaces for
κb = Eub ◦(−).
   Let now α ∈ HAtoms be a Hodge atom appearing in the atomic composition of X. By definition
α is represented by some α ∈ π0 (U   eX ). Let U
                                               eX,α be the corresponding connected component of
eX . Since UX is open and dense in B Hod , the intersection U ∩ UX will be non-trivial and so the
U                                        X
equivalence class of the atomic F-bundle associated with α must be a generalized    eigenbundle for
the action of Eu ⋆(−) on just one of the four pieces (U × D → U λ × D)∗ Hλ , ∇λ .
   This implies that if E α is the finite dimensional Q-linear HodQ -representation corresponding to
α, then we have

         dimQ (E α )Hod(Q) ≤          min            rank (Hu=0
                                                            λ
                                                                )Hod ≤         min            dimk h(b,0 )λ ,
                                λ ∈ {0,9,9ζ,9ζ 2 }                       λ ∈ {0,9,9ζ,9ζ 2 }


where h(b,0 )λ denotes the generalized eigenspace of the operator K|q=1 acting on h(b,0) = ⊕4i=0 k · P i .
   Therefore we get that for every Hodge atom α appearing in the atomic composition of X, the
dimension ρα of Hodge classes in α satisfies

                                      ρα = dimQ (E α )Hod(Q) ≤ 2.

On the other hand, by our assumption of Noether-Lefschetz genericity of X the Hodge pieces in the
degree 4 primitive cohomology of X corresponding to the row
                                                                     
                 h4,0
                  prim (X), h3,1
                             prim (X), h2,2
                                        prim (X), h1,3
                                                   prim (X), h0,4
                                                              prim (X)  = (0, 1, 20, 1, 0)

in the primitive Hodge diamond of X all consist of transcendental cycles. Since by definition the
atomic composition of the cohomology of X is compatible with the Hochschild grading, this implies
that in the atomic composition of X we must have an atom α with Coeff t2 (Pα (t)) = 1.
    Thus, according to Proposition 5.30, it only remains to show that a Hodge atom α with
Coeff t2 (Pα (t)) = 1 and ρα ≤ 2 can not appear in the atomic composition of a smooth projective


                                                         70
     Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


variety of dimension ≤ 2, i.e. can not come from points, curves, or surfaces. Moreover, for each
birational class of surfaces it is sufficient to consider the atomic composition of one representative in
the class.
    But if α is an atom of a point or a curve, then Coeff t2 (Pα (t)) = 0. If, on the other hand, α is an
atom appearing in the atomic composition of a smooth projective surface S, then Coeff t2 (Pα (t)) ≤
H 2,0 (S) = pg (S) and by the classification of surfaces S must be either an abelian surface, a K3
surface, an elliptic surface with κ = 1 and pg = 1, or a surface of general type. But every such
surface has a nef KS , and so by Lemma 5.24 the atomic composition of S consists of a single atom
η(S), and the corresponding representation E η(S) of HodQ (Q) is just equal to HB       •
                                                                                          (S, Q). Since S
is projective it has at least one algebraic cycle of dimension 2 and two more algebraic cycles of
dimension 0 and 4 respectively. Thus ρη(S) ≥ 3. This shows that α can not be an atom of a surface
and so X can not be rational.
Remark 6.10. In the proof of the previous theorem we used the fact that Hodge atoms of algebraic
surfaces for which the p − q = 2 part of Hodge structure is nontrivial must at least a 3 dimensional
space Hodge cycles spanned by the 0-th, 1-st, and 2-nd powers of the hyperplane class. In fact
the Enriques-Kodaira classification of surfaces gives a complete list of Hodge atoms for varieties of
dimension ≤ 2. We have summarized this list in the following table, where again we have simplified
the notation by labeling the Hodge atoms by the corresponding subspaces in the cohomology H • of
the respective variety.

     dim           0            1             1               2                   2                2              2             2
                                                                                                             Enriques
                                                                                                abelian                    general type
                                                                                                                 or
                                           curve C,                            P1 × C          surface S                      with
      X           pt            P1                           P2                                               elliptic
                                           g(C) ≥ 1                           g(C) ≥ 1             or                     ADE singularity
                                                                                                                 or
                                                                                               K3 surface                  → blow up Se
                                                                                                             bielliptic
                                                                                                            |p − q| ≤ 1
                H • (pt)                                                                                         in
  Hodge atoms              H • (pt ∪ pt)   H • (C)    H • (pt ∪ pt ∪ pt)   H • (C) ⊕ H • (C)    H • (S)                       H •( e
                                                                                                                                  S)
                 =C                                                                                          nc-Hodge
                                                                                                             structure



                              Table 1: Hodge atoms for varieties of dimension ≤ 2


   Let X be a smooth cubic fourfold which is Noether-Lefschetz general as in the proof of Theorem 6.8.
The coarse analysis of the atomic composition of X that we used in the previous theorem, can be
made more precise. First we have the following
                         4
Lemma 6.11. For any ϕ ∈ Hprim (X), we have κb (ϕ) = 0.
Proof. It suffices to show that for any ψ ∈ HB  •
                                                  (X), and any curve class β ∈ H2 (X), the Gromov-
Witten invariant ⟨P , ϕ, ψ⟩0,n,β = 0. By the virtual dimension calculation, if ⟨P , ϕ, ψ⟩X
                           X
                                                                                         0,n,β ̸= 0, then
codim ψ ≥ 4. The only possibility is ψ ∈ H 8 (X). Now both P and ψ come from the ambient
projective space. Since ϕ ∈ Hprim4
                                    (X), we deduce that P ⌣ ϕ ⌣ ψ = 0, hence ⟨P , ϕ, ψ⟩X        0,n,β = 0,
completing the proof.
Corollary 6.12. Let X be a very general cubic fourfold over C, then X has 4 Hodge atoms in its
atomic composition. Three of those are one dimensional and correspond to the eigenvectors with
eigenvalues 9, 9ζ, and 9ζ 2 for the action of κb on H(b,0) , and one is 24-dimensional and corresponds
to the generalized eigenspace of κb for the eigenvalue 0.


                                                                    71
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


Proof. By Lemma 6.11 the action of κb = K|q=1 on HB       •
                                                            (X, k) will have a single eigenvalue 0 on
the subspace H (X)prim ⊗ k. Therefore, the piece (H , ∇0 )/U 0 in the spectral decomposition of
                 4                                      0

(H, ∇)/U is a maximal F-bundle of rank 24.
   The Torelli theorem [75, 59, 15] for cubic 4-folds also implies that for a very general X the
transcendental part of the cohomology of X is an irreducible representation of HodQ . Furthermore,
the operator K|q=1 has a size 2 Jordan block corresponding to the eigenvalue 0, and since by
Proposition 5.28 a Hodge atom must have dimension of Hodge classes ≥ 1, it follows that a Hodge
atom α in the atomic composition of X which comes from a generalized eigenspace factor in
(H0 , ∇0 )/U 0 must be the whole thing, i.e. have dimQ E α = 24. This proves the corollary.

Remark 6.13. We expect that the 24 dimensional representation of Hod associated with the atom
is the cohomology of the Kuznetsov component [54] of X.

6.3    Birational maps of Calabi-Yau manifolds
Hodge atoms can also be used effectively to study the motivic properties of birational equivalences
between smooth projective varieties. In particular, Hodge atoms can be used to give a new proof of
Batyrev’s theorem [7, Corollary 6.29] asserting that birationally equivalent Calabi-Yau manifolds
have equal Hodge numbers. The traditional proofs of this result [7, 80, 47] use either motivic
integration, or p-adic Hodge theory and Cěbotarev density. The proof via atoms has a completely
different flavor as it uses Gromov-Witten theory and nc-Hodge theory.
    To show the equality of Hodge numbers we begin with the following observation

Lemma 6.14. Let X1 and X2 be two complex birational Calabi-Yau manifolds of dimension d.
Then the Betti cohomology spaces HB •
                                      (X1 , Q) and HB
                                                    •
                                                      (X2 , Q) are isomorphic as representations of
HodQ (Q). In particular the Z/2-folded Hodge polynomials of X1 and X2 are equal, or equivalently
                     X                     X
                           hp,q (X1 ) =            hp,q (X2 ),   for all k = −d, . . . , d.
                   p−q=k                  p−q=k

Proof. Since KXi is numerically trivial for i = 1, 2, Lemma 5.24 implies that the atomic compositions
of X1 and X2 each consist of a single atom. Let us denote these respective atoms by η(X1 ) and
η(X2 ). Since X1 and X2 are birational, the weak factorization theorem [1] implies that X1
and X2 are related by a sequence of forward/backward blowups with smooth centers. But the
blowup decomposition Theorem 4.5 implies that each such blowup adds to the atomic composition
only atoms of smooth projective varieties of dimension ≤ d − 2. In particular for every such
atom α we must have Coeff td (Pα (t)) = 0. On the other hand hd,0 (Xi ) = 1 for i = 1, 2 and so
Coeff td (η(X1 )) = Coeff td (η(X2 )) = 1. Thus we must have η(X1 ) = η(X2 ) which proves the
lemma.

   Next we will use some special features of the A-model F-bundle in the Calabi-Yau case. Let X be
a d-dimensional complex projective manifold. Let (H, ∇)/BX be the k-analytic maximal A-model
F-bundle of X. Fix any rigid point b ∈ BX   ev
                                               ⊂ BX , so that the coordinate of b corresponding to
1 ∈ HB (X, k) vanishes. Consider the restriction of (H, ∇)|{b}×Spf k[[u]] . Then we have
      0


                 H|{b}×Spf k[[u]] = H • (X)[[u]]
                  ∇|{b}×Spf k[[u]] is given by ∇∂u = ∂u − u−2 Eu ⋆(−) + u−1 Gr,

                                                     72
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


where
                                                 Deg − d · id
                                                 Gr =
                                                      2
is the grading operator, and we write Eu ⋆(−) as a shortcut for Eub ⋆b (−) and H • (X) as a shortcut
for HB•
        (X, k). To keep track of the half integer eigenvalues of Gr, let us also introduce the operator
T : H (X) → H • (X) which is the identity on each H a (X) with a − d odd and is zero on each H a (X)
      •

with a − d even. Note that by definition the operator g = Gr + 12 T is semisimple with integral
eigenvalues. Therefore, we have a meromorphic gauge transformation ug .
    With this notation we now have the following
Claim 6.15. Suppose KX is nef. Then the connection

                ∇∂u = ∂u − u−2 Eu ⋆(−) + u−1 Gr : H • (X)[[u]] −→ H • (X)((u))

has a regular singularity at u = 0. More precisely, the gauge transformed connection

                                               1 −1
                                                        
                                    u ◦ ∇ + u Tdu ◦ u−g
                                     g
                                               2

has a first order pole and a nilpotent residue at u = 0.
Proof. Let ∇
           e = ∇ + 1 u−1 Tdu, then ∇
                   2
                                   e u∂ = ∇u∂ + 1 T, and since g commutes with Gr we get
                                       u     u  2


                 e u∂ ◦ u−g = u∂u − g + 1 T + u−1 ug ◦ (Eu ⋆(−)) ◦ u−g + ug ◦ Gr ◦ u−g
            ug ◦ ∇   u
                                        2
                            = u∂u − u−1 ug ◦ (Eu ⋆(−)) ◦ u−g .

Since KX ≥ 0, and b ∈ BX ev
                             has a vanishing H 0 (X)-coordinate, the operator Eu ⋆(−) will move the
eigenspace of Gr corresponding to an eigenvalue m ∈ 21 Z to the sum of eigenspaces for eigenvalues
≥ m + 1. Thus if we let κij : H i (X, k) → H i+2j (X, k) denote the respective block matrix component
of Eu ⋆(−), then κij = 0 for j ≤ 0. The corresponding block matrix component of the gauged
transformed operator u−1 ug ◦ (Eu ⋆(−)) ◦ u−g is given by the composition
                               i                                               i
                      uconst−⌊ 2 ⌋                u−1 κij                   u⌊ 2 ⌋+j−const /
           H i (X)                   / H i (X)               / H i+2j (X)                      H i+2j (X),

and const ∈ Z. In other words the block matrix component of the transformed operator is u−1+j κij
and so the gauge transformed connection operator ug ◦ ∇  e u∂ ◦ u−g has no pole at u = 0 and the
                                                             u

u = 0 residue of u ◦ ∇∂u ◦ u is strictly lower triangular as a block matrix with entries labeled by
                  g  e      −g

the degree of cohomology.
Theorem 6.16. Let X be a smooth projective complex Calabi-Yau. Then the Hodge numbers of
X can be reconstructed from the atomic F-bundle associated with the Hodge atom η(X) of X. In
particular, birationally equivalent Calabi-Yau manifolds have equal Hodge numbers.
Proof. Let (H, ∇)/BX be the maximal analytic A-model F-bundle of X. Let b ∈ BX           Hod
                                                                                              be a general
point with vanishing component in H (X). Then, since η(X) is the unique Hodge atom in the atomic
                                      0

composition of X, it follows that the germ (H, ∇)/BX (b) represents the atomic F-bundle associated
with η(X). The restriction of this atomic F-bundle to {b} × Spf k[[t]] gives rise to a k((u))-vector space


                                                        73
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


H • (X)((u)) equipped with a meromorphic connection ∇ which by Claim 6.15 has a regular singularity
at u = 0. Thus the k((u))-vector space H • (X)((u)) comes equipped with two natural lattices, i.e. two
k[[u]]-submodules H int , H can , such that H int ⊗k[[u]] k((u)) = H can ⊗k[[u]] k((u)) = H • (X)((u)). Here
H int is the intrinsic lattice, i.e. the module of global sections of the original bundle H|{b}×Spf k[[u]] ,
and H can is the module given by the Deligne’s canonical extension [22, 23] of the regular singular
connection (H • (X)((u)), ∇), i.e. the extension uniquely characterized by the property that in this
extension the connection has a pole of order ≤ 1 with a nilpotent residue.
    This characterization of H can implies that what we showed in Claim 6.15 is that the automorphism
u : H • (X)((u)) → H • (X)((u)) moves the lattice H int to H can . Thus an automorphism of H • (X)((u))
 g

which moves H int isomorphically to H can will induce an additional filtration labeled by cohomological
degree, i.e. by p+q. Combined with the grading by p−1 this gives the (p, q) bigrading on H • (X, k).

6.4    Enhanced atoms and further examples
Hodge atoms can be enhanced in several ways to produce stronger obstructions to rationality. In
particular, we can consider F-bundles equipped with additional algebraic structures, such as pairings,
duality automorphisms, and integral structures. For the analytic A-model F-bundle associated
with a smooth projective variety X, these structures arise naturally from natural structures on
the cohomology of X - the Mukai pairing (which is non-symmetric in general), the Serre functor
automorphism, and the Γ-integral structure. This leads to enhanced versions of the Hodge atoms
- Hodge atoms with pairings, Hodge atoms with duality automorphisms, and Hodge atoms with
integral structures.
  In more detail, let ν : B × D → B × D be the involution given by ν(b, u) = (b, −u). A
non-degenerate pairing on an analytic F-bundle (H, ∇)/B is an even OB×D -linear map

                                        ψ : H ⊗ ν ∗ H −→ OB×D ,

which is symmetric (in the sense that ψ(ξ1 , ξ2 ) = (ν ∗ ψ)(ξ2 , ξ1 ) for all local sections ξ1 ∈ H,
ξ2 ∈ ν ∗ H), non-degenerate (in the sense that it induces an isomorphism H ∼      = ν ∗ H∨ ), and preserved
by ∇ (in the sense that dψ(ξ1 , ξ2 ) = ψ(∇ξ1 , ξ2 ) + ψ(ξ1 , (ν ∗ ∇)ξ2 )). Alternatively, a non-degenerate
pairing can be specified by an isomorphism Ψ : H f   → ν ∗ H∨ of super vector bundles on B × D, which
intertwines the connections on the source and target, and is self-dual in the sense that ν ∗ Ψ∨ = Ψ.
Note that the by definition non-degenerate pairings are compatible with the spectral decomposition
of F-bundles. This immediately gives induced pairings on G-atoms.
    A duality automorphism of an F-bundle (H, ∇)/B equipped with a non-degenerate pairing
ψ is an automorphism S : H|B×{u=1} → H|B×{u=1} of the restricted bundle H|B×{u=1} which
satisfies appropriate compatibility conditions with ∇ and ψ. It takes some work to formulate
these compatibilities since they are inherently transcendental and require the Riemann-Hilbert
correspondence which is not readily available in the non-archimedean analytic setting. We will
discuss this in more detail in [49] but for now let us give a brief topological discussion of this
interpretation.
   Suppose that S 1 = { u : |u| = 1 } ⊂ C is the unit circle, and let ν : S 1 → S 1 be the negation
map ν(u) = −u. Let H → S 1 be a local system of finite dimensional complex super vector spaces. As
before we define a symmetric non-degenerate pairing on H as an isomorphism Ψ : H f   → ν ∗ H∨ , such
that ν Ψ = Ψ. Similarly, if V is a finite dimensional complex super vector space, then we define a
      ∗ ∨

(not necessarily symmetric) non-degenerate pairing on V as a linear isomorphism G : V f   → V ∨.


                                                    74
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


   The basic observation here is that datum (H, Ψ) is equivalent to the datum (V, G). Indeed:
    (1) Given a pair (H, Ψ) as above, we can assign to it a pair (V, G) as follows. Take V to be the
fiber V = H1 of H at the point 1 ∈ S 1 , and take G : V → V ∨ to be the composition G = Ψ−1 ◦τarc+ .
Here Ψ−1 : H−1 → H1∨ is the pairing at the point (−1) ∈ S 1 and τarc+ : H1 → H−1 is the√     parallel
transport in H along the positively oriented upper semicircle arc+ : [0, π] → S 1 , t → exp( −1t).
    (2) Given a pair (V, G) we can assign to it a pair (H, Ψ) as follows. Take H to be the local
system which on the upper semicircle is constant with fiber V , on the lower semicircle is constant
with fiber V ∨ , and such that the fibers at (−1) are glued by the isomorphism G : V → V ∨ and the
fibers at 1 are glued by the isomorphism G∨ : V → V ∨ . Schematically we can describe H by the
gluing diagram
                                               V
                                           H :         G                    G∨                                .
                                                                       
                                              V∨
Note that with this definition, if we identify H1 with V , then the monodromy operator mon1 : H1 →
H1 of H at the point 1 ∈ S 1 (for going once around S 1 in the counterclockwise direction), is given
by mon1 = (G∨ )−1 ◦ G : V → V .
   This description immediately yields analogous explicit presentations of ν ∗ H and ν ∗ H∨ :
                                V                                                                                     V
         ν∗H :    (G∨ )−1                G−1                            and              ν ∗ H∨ :             G                G∨   ,
                                                                                                                        
                                V∨                                                                                    V∨
and we define the map Ψ : H → ν ∗ H∨ to be

                                                       V
                                                                            id           /V               .
                                                                        ∨                             ∨
                                               G                    G            G                G
                                                                                           
                                                       V∨                            / V∨
                                                                            id


    The two assignments (H, Ψ) 7→ (V, G) and (V, G) 7→ (H, Ψ) are inverse to each other and
establish the equivalence of pairing data.
   Let now X be a complex smooth projective variety. Assume for simplicity that the quantum
product is convergent and so we have a complex analytic version (H, ∇)/BX of the A-model maximal
F-bundle for X. In this case we have Hu := H|B×{u} = HB         •
                                                                  (X, C) ⊗ OB , and we can define
ψu : Hu ⊗OB H−u → OB to be the pairing between H|B×{u} = HB               •
                                                                            (X, Q) ⊗ OB to be the
OB -linear extension of the Poincaré pairing on HB (X, Q). The pairing ψ defined in this way is
                                                   •

compatible with geometric data:
    (a) The pairing ψ is preserved by the connection ∇. Indeed, in the u-direction we have
∇∂u = ∂u − u−2 Eu ⋆(−) + u−1 Gr, the operators Eu ⋆(−) and Gr are independent of u, and by
definition Eu ⋆(−) is selfadjoint with respect to the Poincaré pairing while Gr is anti-selfadjoint
with respect to the the Poincaré pairing. Similarly, along B, the connection is given by covariant
derivatives ∇∂τ = ∂τ + u−1 τ ⋆ (−) or ∇ξq∂q = ξq∂q + u−1 ξ ⋆ (−), and since the operators τ ⋆ (−) or
ξ ⋆ (−) are all self adjoint, it follows that ψ is horizontal along B as well.


                                                                            75
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


    (b) The pairing ψ takes integral values on the Γ-lattice in H. Indeed, recall from [48, Section 3.1]
that if (H, ∇)/BX is of exponential type, one can construct a special Z-local subsystem E ⊂
            ∇
(H|BX ·D× ) in the local system of ∇-horizontal sections in the restriction of H to the complement
of the divisor {u = 0}. The local system E has the property, that E ⊗Z O ∼    = H over BX × D× , and
conjecturally, for every b ∈ BX its restriction to {b} × D is compatible with the Deligne-Malgrange-
                                                          ×

Stokes filtration for the wildly ramified connection (H, ∇)|{b}×D . For any point (b, u) ∈ BX ×D× , the
fiber E(b,u) of the local system E is defined as a particular embedding ı(b̃,log u) : Ktop (X) → H(b,u) ,
which depends on a lift (b̃, log u) of (b, u) in the universal cover of BX × D× , and is given by a
multiplication of the Chern character map by the Gamma class of X. The compatibility of ψ and
E is then expressed in the property that for every (b, u), any two elements s1 , s2 ∈ E(b,u ), and any
choice of a branch of the logarithm which is well defined on the upper semicircle arc+ , we have that

                               ψu (ı(b̃,log u) (s1 ), ı(b̃,log(−u)) (τarc+ (s2 )) ∈ Z.

Furthermore, the value of this pairing does not depend on the lifts and if s1 and s2 are the Chern
characters of two objects E1 and E2 in the derived category Db (X), then we have

                      ψu (ı(b̃,log u) (s1 ), ı(b̃,log(−u)) (τarc+ (s2 )) = χ(RHom(E1 , E2 )).

   (c) Equivalently, the compatibility described in (b) can be reformulated as follows. Consider the
Euler pairing defined by
                                                          Dp                           E
           χ : HB  (X, C) ⊗ HB (X, C) → C, χ(a, b) :=
                 •           •
                                                                         p
                                                             td(X) ⌣ a, td(X) ⌣ b ,

where ⟨ −, −⟩ is the Mukai pairing
                                              Z
                               ⟨ v, v ′ ⟩ =        (v ∨ ⌣ v ′ ) ⌣ exp(c1 (X)/2),
                                               X
                                                                                     P √
and the dual v ∨ of a cohomology class v = k vk ∈ ⊕k HB  k
                                                           (X, C) is defined by v ∨ = k ( −1)k vk .
                                          P
As usual, here theP  Euler pairing is normalized so that if E and F are objects in Db (X), then
χ(ch(E), ch(F )) = (−1)k dimC Extk (E, F ).
        Let V = HB •
                     (X, C), and let G : V → V ∨ be the map a 7→ χ(a, −). Then composing G with
the clockckwise half circle parallel transport in (H, ∇) we get a non-degenerate symmetric pairing
H ⊗ν ∗ H∨ → O which we will call the F-bundle Euler pairing. When (H, ∇)/BX is of exponential
type, the F-bundle Euler pairing is identified with the Poincaré duality non-degenerate pairing
defined above. This follows from the observation that for every cohomology class s ∈ HB   2 odd
                                                                                                (X), we
have that the operator on HB  •
                                (X) of pclassical multiplication by exp(s) preserves the Euler pairing
χ(−, −). Since the multiplication by td(X) and the multiplication by the Gamma class differ by
multiplications by such exp(s) we conclude that the non-symmetric pairing attached to ψ and the
map given by a 7→ χ(a, −) will coincide.
       Extra work is required to carry out this comparison for the non-archimedean A-model
F-bundles, and this will be discussed in more detail in [49].

   (d) Finally, we have the duality automorphism S : HB  •
                                                           (X, C) → HB   •
                                                                           (X, C) given by the cup
product with (−1) exp(−c1 (x)), which by Serre duality satisfies χ(a, b) = χ(b, S(a)) for all a, b. In
                  d



                                                        76
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


particular S = (G∨ )−1 ◦ G, i.e. S equals the monodromy operator on H1 for the loop in the u plane
going once in the counterclockwise direction around the origin. This gives an analytic automorphism
of H1 which will again denote by S. By construction S will be preserved by the connection along B.
Therefore, if (H, ∇)/B is a complex analytic F-bundle of exponential type with a non-degenerate
pairing ψ we can define the F-bundle duality automorphism S : H|B×{u=1} → H|B×{u=1} to
be the monodromy in the u-direction. Its compatibility with the pairing is expressed by the property
χ(a, b) = χ(b, S(a)), where χ is the non-symmetric pairing on H|B×{u=1} associated with ψ via the
above procedure. Again, the definition in the case of non-archimedean analytic F-bundle requires
extra work, and will be discussed in [49].

    The theory of Hodge atoms enhanced with Euler pairings and Serre automorphisms is completely
straightforward and is just a repeat of the theory of undecorated Hodge atoms. The theory of
Hodge atoms enhanced with an integral structure is much more difficult and requires substantial
work and new ideas. Already the definition of an integral structure on a k-analytic F-bundle is
non-trivial due to the limited understanding of the Riemann-Hilbert correspondence we have in the
equal characteristic non-archimedean analytic setting. Additionally one needs to prove the existence
of the Γ-corrected integral structure for analytic A-model F-bundles of projective manifolds, and has
to show that the blowup decomposition from Theorem 4.5 is compatible with Γ-corrected integral
structures. We deal with all these issues in forthcoming work [49].
    Here we just note that with the enhancements in place, we get a stronger version of the non-
rationality criterion Proposition 5.30. In this version we conclude that if a smooth projective variety
X has an enhanced atomic composition containing an enhanced atom that does not come from a
smooth projective variety of dimension ≤ dim X − 2, then X can not be rational.
   In the remainder of this section we will discuss some interesting applications of this theory.
Example 6.17. Let X be a very general cubic fourfold contating a plane P ⊂ X. Then the linear
projection centered at P gives a quadric surface fibration on Y → P2 on the fourfold Y = BlP X.
The fibration Y → P2 gives rise to a double cover S → P2 - the K3 surface parametrizing the rulings
of the quadrics and a P1 -bundle R → S parametrizing the lines in the quadrics.
    If α ∈ H 2 (S, O× ) is the characteristic class of the Brauer-Severi variety R, then α defines a
2-torsion gerbe α S on S , whose weight one derived category is the derived category Db (S, α) of
α-twisted sheaves on S.
    In [54] Kuznetsov proved that for a general cubic with a plane the category Db (S, α) can not be
equivalent to the derived category of any smooth projective surface. In fact, he showed that the
numerical K-group Knum (S, α) of Db (S, α) viewed as a lattice equipped with the α-twisted Mukai
pairing, can not be isomorphic to the numerical K-lattice of any smooth projective surface. On the
other hand the spectrum calculation in the proof of Theorem 6.8 and formalism of Hodge atoms
enhanced with pairings and integral structures immediately gives that the α-twisted Hodge structure
on H • (S) together with its integral structure and Mukai pairing gives an atom in the enhanced
atomic composition of X. Since enhanced atoms give obstructions to rationality this implies that X
is not rational.
Example 6.18. Let X = ∩t∈A Qt be the base locus of a general net A ∼
                                                                   = P2 ⊂ |OP7 (2)| of quadrics
in P . Then X contains a line ℓ ⊂ X, and
    7

   (1) Y = {(t, Π) | ℓ ⊂ Π ⊂ Qt } ⊂ Gr(3, 8) is a smooth fourfold Y , which is birational to X.
   (2) Y → A is a quadric surface fibration which gives rise to


                                                  77
         Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


         - a double cover S → P2 - a surface of general type parametrizing the rulings of the quadrics.
         - a P1 -bundle R → S parametrizing the lines in the fibers of Y → P2 .
If α ∈ H 2 (S, O× ) is the characteristic class of the Brauer-Severi variety R, then again we get a
2-torsion gerbe α S on S, and a twisted derived category Db (S, α).
    Again the α-twisted Hodge structure of S together with its Mukai pairing and integral structure
gives rise of an enhanced Hodge atom in the atomic composition of X. Similarly to the case of a
cubic with a plane, it can be shown [25] that the numerical K-lattice of Db (X, α) is not isomorphic
to the numerical K-lattice of any smooth projective surface, and so Db (X, α) can not be equivalent
to the derived category of any smooth projective surface. Thus the very general X can not be
rational. This argument gives a new proof of a non-rationality theorem of Hassett-Pirutka-Tschinkel
[33].
Example 6.19. Let X ⊂ P5 be a very general smooth quartic hypersurface. Its non-rationality
is known by the works of Kollár [51], Schreieder [72], and Totaro [74]. We outline an atom theory
argument also proving that very general X is not rational.
    Suppose X is Noether-Lefschetz general so that it has Picard rank one. By repeating the
argument in the proof of Theorem 6.8 we see that the Hodge atom corresponding to the eigenvalue
zero for the quantum multiplication by the Euler vector field looks like the Hodge atom of a surface
of general type.
    At the point b in BX corresponding to the hyperplane class, the atomic composition of H • (X)
looks like

(6.20)                          H • (X) = α(X) ⊕ α+ (X) ⊕ α− (X).

Here α(X) is the atom corresponding to eigenvalue zero of Eu ⋆(−) and is shaped like an atom of a
surface of a general type, while α+ (X) and α− (X) are one dimensional atoms corresponding to
eigenvalues which are scalings of ±1. The Witt algebra argument from Remark 3.14 shows that
there is no further splitting if we move in a small analytic neighborhood of b.
    As explained in Claim 6.15 the quantum connection for a surface of general type has regular
singularities and so the conjugacy class of its monodromy is well defined and is unipotent on the
even cohomohology of the surface.
    However, from the point of view of the decomposition (6.20), in the cohomological grading the
Serre automorphism S associated with the α(X) has a graded minimal polynomial S 3 = [4]. This
contradicts the unipotency of the monodromy on the even part of an atom of a surface of general
type. Thus α(X) cannot be an enhanced atom associated with surface of general type which proves
the non rationality of very general X.
Example 6.21. Consider a smooth three dimensional cubic X ⊂ P4 . Again for the point b ∈ BX
corresponding to the hyperplane class, the atomic composition of X consists of three atoms - two
one dimensional atoms corresponding to non-zero eigenvalues of Eu ⋆(−), and one atom α(X)
corresponding to the eigenvalue 0. The Witt algebra argument from Remark 3.14 shows that there
is no further splitting in a neighborhood of b.
    By Claim 6.15 the quantum connection for a higher genus curve will have regular singularities,
and a well defined conjugacy class of the monodromy which will be unipotent on the even cohomology
and quasi-unipotent with eigenvalue −1 on the odd cohomology.
    The atom α(X) looks like the atom of a smooth projective curve of genus 5 but when viewed as
a Hodge atom enhanced with a Serre automorphism, the corresponding Serre automorphism S in


                                                  78
    Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


the cohomological Z-grading satisfies the graded minimal polynomial S 5 = [3]. Thus S can not have
an eigenvalue −1 and so S cannot be a Serre automorphism for a smooth genus 5 curve. So we get
that all smooth three dimensional cubics are not rational. Similar approach applies to other three
dimensional Fanos.


References
 [1] Dan Abramovich, Kalle Karu, Kenji Matsuki, and Jarosław Włodarczyk. Torification and factorization
     of birational maps. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 15(3):531–572, 2002.
 [2] Nicolas Addington and Richard Thomas. Hodge theory and derived categories of cubic fourfolds. Duke
     Math. J., 163(10):1885–1927, 2014.
 [3] Yves André. Pour une théorie inconditionnelle des motifs. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., 83:5–49,
     1996.
 [4] Yves André. Une introduction aux motifs (motifs purs, motifs mixtes, périodes), volume 17 of Panoramas
     et Synthèses [Panoramas and Syntheses]. Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 2004.
 [5] Asher Auel, Christian Böhning, and Alena Pirutka. Stable rationality of quadric and cubic surface
     bundle fourfolds. Eur. J. Math., 4(3):732–760, 2018.
 [6] The Stacks Project Authors. Stacks project, 2025.
 [7] Victor V. Batyrev. Stringy Hodge numbers of varieties with Gorenstein canonical singularities. In
     Integrable systems and algebraic geometry (Kobe/Kyoto, 1997), pages 1–32. World Sci. Publ., River
     Edge, NJ, 1998.
 [8] Arnaud Beauville. Variétés de Prym et jacobiennes intermédiaires. Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4),
     10(3):309–391, 1977.
 [9] Arnaud Beauville and Ron Donagi. La variété des droites d’une hypersurface cubique de dimension 4.
     C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I Math., 301(14):703–706, 1985.
[10] Kai Behrend. Gromov-Witten invariants in algebraic geometry. Invent. Math., 127(3):601–617, 1997.
[11] Kai Behrend and Barbara Fantechi. The intrinsic normal cone. Invent. Math., 128(1):45–88, 1997.
[12] Vladimir G. Berkovich. Spectral theory and analytic geometry over non-Archimedean fields, volume 33
     of Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1990.
[13] Franziska Bittner. The universal Euler characteristic for varieties of characteristic zero. Compos. Math.,
     140(4):1011–1032, 2004.
[14] Leonardo Cavenaghi, Lino Grama, Ludmil Katzarkov, and Maxim Kontsevich. Atoms meet symbols,
     2025. in preparation.
[15] François Charles. A remark on the Torelli theorem for cubic fourfolds, 2012.
[16] Zihong Chen. On the exponential type conjecture, 2024.
[17] Ionuţ Ciocan-Fontanine, Bumsig Kim, and Claude Sabbah. The abelian/nonabelian correspondence
     and Frobenius manifolds. Invent. Math., 171(2):301–343, 2008.
[18] Tom Coates and Alexander Givental. Quantum Riemann-Roch, Lefschetz and Serre. Ann. of Math.
     (2), 165(1):15–53, 2007.
[19] Olivier Debarre and Alexander Kuznetsov. Gushel-Mukai varieties: classification and birationalities.
     Algebr. Geom., 5(1):15–76, 2018.
[20] Olivier Debarre and Alexander Kuznetsov. Gushel-Mukai varieties: intermediate Jacobians. Épijournal
     Géom. Algébrique, 4:Art. 19, 45, 2020.
[21] Olivier Debarre and Giovanni Mongardi. Gushel-Mukai varieties with many symmetries and an explicit
     irrational Gushel-Mukai threefold. Boll. Unione Mat. Ital., 15(1-2):133–161, 2022.
[22] Pierre Deligne. Équations différentielles à points singuliers réguliers, volume Vol. 163 of Lecture Notes
     in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1970.
[23] Pierre Deligne. Local behavior of Hodge structures at infinity. In Mirror symmetry, II, volume 1 of
     AMS/IP Stud. Adv. Math., pages 683–699. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1997.


                                                     79
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


[24] Pierre Deligne, James S. Milne, Arthur Ogus, and Kuang-yen Shih. Hodge cycles, motives, and Shimura
     varieties, volume 900 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, 1982.
[25] Ron Donagi and Tony Pantev. The intersection of three quadrics in P7 revisited, 2025. preprint.
[26] Boris Dubrovin. Geometry of 2D topological field theories. In Integrable systems and quantum groups
     (Montecatini Terme, 1993), volume 1620 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 120–348. Springer, Berlin,
     1996.
[27] Alexander B. Givental. Homological geometry and mirror symmetry. In Proceedings of the International
     Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. 1, 2 (Zürich, 1994), pages 472–480. Birkhäuser, Basel, 1995.
[28] Alexander B. Givental. Equivariant Gromov-Witten invariants. Internat. Math. Res. Notices, 13:613–663,
     1996.
[29] Hans Grauert and Reinhold Remmert. Theory of Stein spaces. Classics in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag,
     Berlin, 2004. Translated from the German by Alan Huckleberry, Reprint of the 1979 translation.
[30] Brendan Hassett. Special cubic fourfolds. Compositio Math., 120(1):1–23, 2000.
[31] Brendan Hassett. Cubic fourfolds, K3 surfaces, and rationality questions. In Rationality problems in
     algebraic geometry, volume 2172 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 29–66. Springer, Cham, 2016.
[32] Brendan Hassett, Alena Pirutka, and Yuri Tschinkel. Intersections of three quadrics in P7 . In Surveys
     in differential geometry 2017. Celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Journal of Differential Geometry,
     volume 22 of Surv. Differ. Geom., pages 259–274. Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2018.
[33] Brendan Hassett, Alena Pirutka, and Yuri Tschinkel. Intersections of three quadrics in P7 . In Surveys
     in differential geometry 2017. Celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Journal of Differential Geometry,
     volume 22 of Surv. Differ. Geom., pages 259–274. Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2018.
[34] Brendan Hassett, Alena Pirutka, and Yuri Tschinkel. Stable rationality of quadric surface bundles over
     surfaces. Acta Math., 220(2):341–365, 2018.
[35] Brendan Hassett, Alena Pirutka, and Yuri Tschinkel. A very general quartic double fourfold is not
     stably rational. Algebr. Geom., 6(1):64–75, 2019.
[36] C. Hertling. Frobenius manifolds and moduli spaces for singularities, volume 151 of Cambridge Tracts
     in Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
[37] Claus Hertling. tt∗ geometry, Frobenius manifolds, their connections, and the construction for singular-
     ities. J. Reine Angew. Math., 555:77–161, 2003.
[38] Thorgal Hinault, Tony Yue Yu, Chi Zhang, and Shaowu Zhang. Decomposition and framing of F-bundles
     and applications to quantum cohomology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02266, 2024.
[39] Kentaro Hori and Cumrun Vafa. Mirror symmetry. arXiv preprint hep-th/0002222, 2000.
[40] Annette Huber and Stefan Müller-Stach. Periods and Nori motives, volume 65 of Ergebnisse der
     Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics [Results in
     Mathematics and Related Areas. 3rd Series. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics]. Springer,
     Cham, 2017. With contributions by Benjamin Friedrich and Jonas von Wangenheim.
[41] Daniel Huybrechts. The K3 category of a cubic fourfold. Compos. Math., 153(3):586–620, 2017.
[42] Daniel Huybrechts. The geometry of cubic hypersurfaces, volume 206 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced
     Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2023.
[43] Hiroshi Iritani. Quantum D-modules and generalized mirror transformations. Topology, 47(4):225–276,
     2008.
[44] Hiroshi Iritani. Quantum cohomology of blowups, 2023.
[45] Hiroshi Iritani and Yuki Koto. Quantum cohomology of projective bundles, 2024.
[46] Hiroshi Iritani, Etienne Mann, and Thierry Mignon. Quantum Serre theorem as a duality between
     quantum D-modules. Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN, 9:2828–2888, 2016.
[47] Tetsushi Ito. Stringy Hodge numbers and p-adic Hodge theory. Compos. Math., 140(6):1499–1517,
     2004.
[48] Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, and Tony Pantev. Hodge theoretic aspects of mirror symmetry.
     In From Hodge theory to integrability and TQFT tt*-geometry, volume 78 of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math.,
     pages 87–174. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2008.


                                                     80
     Birational Invariants from Hodge Structures and Quantum Multiplication


[49] Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, and Tony Yue YU. Enhanced atoms and integrality,
     2025. in preparation.
[50] Bumsig Kim. Quantum hyperplane section theorem for homogeneous spaces. Acta Math., 183(1):71–99,
     1999.
[51] János Kollár. Nonrational hypersurfaces. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 8:241–249, 1995.
[52] Maxim Kontsevich and Yuri Manin. Gromov-Witten classes, quantum cohomology, and enumerative
     geometry. Comm. Math. Phys., 164(3):525–562, 1994.
[53] Viktor S. Kulikov. A remark on the nonrationality of a generic cubic fourfold. Mat. Zametki, 83(1):61–68,
     2008.
[54] Alexander Kuznetsov. Derived categories of cubic fourfolds. In Cohomological and geometric approaches
     to rationality problems, volume 282 of Progr. Math., pages 219–243. Birkhäuser Boston, Boston, MA,
     2010.
[55] Alexander Kuznetsov. Derived categories view on rationality problems. In Rationality problems in
     algebraic geometry, volume 2172 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 67–104. Springer, Cham, 2016.
[56] Alexander Kuznetsov and Yuri Prokhorov. Rationality of Mukai varieties over non-closed fields. In
     Rationality of varieties, volume 342 of Progr. Math., pages 249–290. Birkhäuser/Springer, Cham, [2021]
     ©2021.
[57] Alexander Kuznetsov and Yuri Prokhorov. Rationality of Fano threefolds over non-closed fields. Amer.
     J. Math., 145(2):335–411, 2023.
[58] Yuan-Pin Lee. Quantum Lefschetz hyperplane theorem. Invent. Math., 145(1):121–149, 2001.
[59] Eduard Looijenga. The period map for cubic fourfolds. Invent. Math., 177(1):213–233, 2009.
[60] Yuri I. Manin. Frobenius manifolds, quantum cohomology, and moduli spaces, volume 47 of American
     Mathematical Society Colloquium Publications. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1999.
[61] James S. Milne. Algebraic groups, volume 170 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge, 2017. The theory of group schemes of finite type over a field.
[62] James S. Milne. Classification of the Mumford–Tate groups of rational polarizable Hodge structures,
     2023.
[63] James S. Milne. Tannakian categories, 2025.
[64] Jacob P. Murre, Jan Nagel, and Chris A. M. Peters. Lectures on the theory of pure motives, volume 61
     of University Lecture Series. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2013.
[65] Madhav Nori. TIFR notes on motives, 1998.
[66] Alena Pirutka. Varieties that are not stably rational, zero-cycles and unramified cohomology. In
     Algebraic geometry: Salt Lake City 2015, volume 97.2 of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 459–483.
     Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2018.
[67] Daniel Pomerleano and Paul Seidel. The quantum connection, Fourier-Laplace transform, and families
     of A-infinity-categories, 2024.
[68] Claude Sabbah. Isomonodromic deformations and Frobenius manifolds. Universitext. Springer-Verlag
     London, Ltd., London; EDP Sciences, Les Ulis, french edition, 2007. An introduction.
                                                (k)
[69] Kyoji Saito. The higher residue pairings KF for a family of hypersurface singular points. In Singularities,
     Part 2 (Arcata, Calif., 1981), volume 40 of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., pages 441–463. Amer. Math.
     Soc., Providence, RI, 1983.
[70] Kyoji Saito. Period mapping associated to a primitive form. Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci., 19(3):1231–1264,
     1983.
[71] Morihiko Saito. On the structure of Brieskorn lattice. Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble), 39(1):27–72, 1989.
[72] Stefan Schreieder. Stably irrational hypersurfaces of small slopes. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 32:1171–1199,
     2019.
[73] Amaury Thuillier. Géométrie toroïdale et géométrie analytique non archimédienne. Application au
     type d’homotopie de certains schémas formels. Manuscripta Math., 123(4):381–451, 2007.
[74] Burt Totaro. Hypersurfaces that are not stably rational. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 29:883–891, 2016.
[75] Claire Voisin. Théorème de Torelli pour les cubiques de P5 . Invent. Math., 86(3):577–601, 1986.


                                                      81
          Ludmil Katzarkov, Maxim Kontsevich, Tony Pantev, Tony Yue YU


[76] Claire Voisin. Integral Hodge classes, decompositions of the diagonal, and rationality questions. In
     Trends in contemporary mathematics, volume 8 of Springer INdAM Ser., pages 137–149. Springer,
     Cham, 2014.
[77] Claire Voisin. Unirational threefolds with no universal codimension 2 cycle. Invent. Math., 201(1):207–
     237, 2015.
[78] Claire Voisin. Stable birational invariants and the Lüroth problem. In Surveys in differential geometry
     2016. Advances in geometry and mathematical physics, volume 21 of Surv. Differ. Geom., pages 313–342.
     Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2016.
[79] Claire Voisin. Birational invariants and decomposition of the diagonal. In Birational geometry of
     hypersurfaces, volume 26 of Lect. Notes Unione Mat. Ital., pages 3–71. Springer, Cham, [2019] ©2019.
[80] Chin-Lung Wang. K-equivalence in birational geometry. In Second International Congress of Chinese
     Mathematicians, volume 4 of New Stud. Adv. Math., pages 199–216. Int. Press, Somerville, MA, 2004.
[81] Jaroslaw Włodarczyk. Birational cobordisms and factorization of birational maps. J. Algebraic Geom.,
     9(3):425–449, 2000.

   Ludmil Katzarkov, IMSA, University of Miami, USA; ICMS, IMI, Bulgaria; HSE University,
Russia
   Email: l.katzarkov@math.miami.edu
   Maxim Kontsevich, Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, France
   Email: maxim@ihes.fr
   Tony Pantev, University of Pennsylvania, USA
   Email: tpantev@math.upenn.edu
   Tony Yue Yu, California Institute of Technology, USA
   Email: yuyuetony@gmail.com




                                                    82
